---
sidebar_position: 3
---


## 5.2 Lessons learnt
Countries identified some key lessons during the operationalization of the tool’s development process, and these include:
1.	When there is high demand for inclusion of several questions from various stakeholders this causes delays in the process of completing the development of the questionnaires; therefore, the NSO should be prepared with the UN P&R for population censuses to be able to get solutions and satisfy the users. Otherwise, the enumeration will take longer and is likely to become more costly. For instance, countries that took on too many questions for the cartographic mapping questionnaire experienced delays and failed to achieve the set timelines. The questionnaire must not be too long, and the questions must be clear. 
2.	In a digital census, not all populations will be enumerated using a tablet, therefore, all paper questionnaires should be well formatted and ready for printing when the need arises. For instance, Kenya realized after the pilot census and various pretests that enumeration of persons in hotels and lodges had to be undertaken using hard copy short questionnaires. This was because of the logistical challenge of visiting this population in their rooms, bearing in mind that they had to be enumerated strictly in the morning of the reference night. 
3.	Insufficient time allocated to software development can be disastrous in terms of half-hearted outputs that lead to poor quality data, loss of time and money among others. It is therefore important to give sufficient time to develop and test the census system, the software manager must give the time needed to develop the system. Namibia had to postpone a pilot testing because the time allocated for application development was too short, resulting from a plan that fixed the pilot census dates without due consideration of the time required for development and finalization the questionnaire application. 
4.	The questionnaires and instructions manual if not developed and tested concurrently can lead to delays and disrupted training if they are not in tandem. For instance, Namibia realized that they could not proceed with a pilot test because both instructions manuals for questionnaire and application had a lot of changes coming up during the Master training and the decision was made to postpone training, go back and replan timelines to allow sufficient time for the tool’s development and testing.
