---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Introduction
## 7.1 Census Logistics
### 7.1.1 Introduction 
Census undertaking requires robust logistics planning for effective implementation of all the processes. Census logistics broadly entails procurement of equipment and materials, transportation, and storage. During procurement, the process of acquisition and storage of the census equipment and materials needs to be planned for effectively. 
Traditionally, during implementation of censuses, large quantities of materials are procured for various purposes like field gear for cartographic mapping teams, uniform for the enumeration team - usually t-shirts or reflector jackets, field bags, umbrellas, printing of manuals, questionnaires, etc. In a digital census, procurement of ICT equipment like server, tablets and accessories, sim-cards and bundles etc. are procured. Mobile devices are usually delicate and need careful handling during storage, provisioning, and transportation to the field and back to the warehouse for decommissioning. During provisioning and decommissioning a spacious warehousing facility with good racking systems for ease of retrieval will be required.  

**Considerations for census logistics planning**
The census implementing agencies should put in place the following considerations:
-	Committee formation - A census logistics committee to plan and implement all the logistical activities and processes. Census logistics requires timely completion of a census implementation plan and careful linking of the different activities of census phases.
-	Procurement - Early planning for procurement of all the census materials and equipment is key to the success of census implementation.  However, this is also dependent on availability of financial resources. 
-	Transportation - A well thought out secure transportation requirements plan for the tablets, to ensure that the tablets get to the right geographic destination. 
-	Storage - There should be security and storage arrangements at the regional offices for delivery from the central office and collection point after enumeration. An assessment of the quantity of each of the items is important for planning for the storage space before dispatching to the field and storage after field work before disposal and transport logistics to and from the field. 
-	Collaboration - census implementing agencies should consider collaborating with other government institutions that can support in providing logistics arrangements such as transportation, use of existing infrastructure like school classrooms for training, warehousing services for storage of census materials at both national and sub-national level etc. 
-	Contracting out – categorize the core and non-core activities that may need to be contracted out as a way of increasing efficiency where methods and technologies are not available internally. Ensure proper understanding and management of elements that contribute to final data quality, and maintain confidentiality.

### 7.1.2	Selected country experiences
Countries had various ways they addressed the census logistics plans during implementation of the census. Some established guidelines, committees and collaborations with other institutions, and others hired logistics firms to manage the various census logistics components. 

#### 7.1.2.1	Transportation 

**Kenya**
>Many vehicles were used to facilitate implementation of all the census activities. The vehicles included the KNBS fleet and mobilized vehicles through hiring; borrowing from other government departments and ministries; use of alternative transport such as boats and motorbikes; and use of flights/helicopters in difficult terrain and insecure places. During actual enumeration stage, about 4,500 vehicles were used.  Fueling and maintenance of the vehicles during pilot cartographic mapping was done by transport section at the headquarters by allocation of specific fuel cards.  While during enumeration, fueling and maintenance was done at approved petrol stations and garages. 

#### 7.1.2.2	Dispatch of Various Materials
**Kenya**
>During the pre-enumeration phase, the materials included: T-shirts, fliers, notebooks, field bags, identification badges, dustless chalks, felt pens, umbrellas, field boots, and tablets among others. These materials were issued to the team leaders centrally who in turn distributed to their team members. The publicity materials included brochures and posters. The recruitment materials included printed forms for recording applicant’s details, counter books that acted as a register for applicants. The training materials included manuals, notebooks, marker pens, pens, chalks, tablets, and power banks/solar chargers. The enumeration materials included tablets, bags, ID badges, power banks, solar chargers, torches with batteries, reflector jackets, and cards (structure numbering, call back and travelers). The census logistics team prepared and effected a delivery plan of the procured materials. The materials were either procured centrally at KNBS headquarters or at the counties. The team also developed issuance forms and guidelines on handling, storage, and issuance.  
>The mobile devices were assembled by two local universities namely, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology and Moi University. The mobile devices were delivered directly by the universities to the storage facilities in the counties. The tablets for use by ICT Supervisors were delivered directly to counties that had venues for the ICT Supervisors training. The other tablets and power banks/ solar chargers were distributed to the county storage facilities.
>All counties had been guided to identify appropriate storage facilities at the county level. The Bureau requested and was granted use of storage containers from the Ministry of Energy. The containers were referred to as “Gas Yetu Containers” and were initially used by the Ministry to distribute LPG and were available up to sub county level. Other storage facilities included KNBS offices and county commissioner offices. Armed security, through Kenya Police Service, were deployed to guard the premises when census materials were within the counties. 
>Dispatch of the census materials was done using various modes. Lorries and canters from the National Youth Service and Special Programs department were used to ferry materials to various regions. Courier services were used to send materials which were urgently needed to the counties. Helicopters from the department of defense airlifted material to the far counties. At the county level, the CSOs with assistance of the county lead coordinators distributed materials to the personnel. Most of the materials were distributed at the various training centers where the ICT and content supervisors handled the distribution. 

#### 7.1.2.3	Retrieval of Census Materials 
**Kenya**
>Guidelines were developed on return of the census materials from the counties. The materials that census personnel were to return included tablets, power banks, solar chargers, maps, ID Badges, questionnaires, and notebooks. The enumerators submitted their materials to their content supervisors then the content supervisors submitted to the ICT supervisor who in turn returned to the CSO. The mobile devices (tablets, solar chargers, and power banks) were returned to main storage facility at KNBS headquarters. A delivery plan had the first devices received at the main storage facility on 9th September 2019 and the last county delivered on 2nd November 2019.  The returned devices had their details captured into an MS Access database to ease future retrievals.  
>The census logistics team was composed of one census coordinator and four logistics officers. The logistics officers were allocated specific counties. Up to 40 logistics casuals were engaged prior to census enumeration and were engaged up to the period when the devices had been received at the KNBS HQs storage.  

### 7.1.3	Lessons Learnt
There are some lessons to learn from the challenges faced by countries during the 2020 PHC round and these are documented in this sub section to inform future digital censuses: 	 
1.	Late constitution of census logistics team to handle tasks during enumeration led to hurried development and implementation of activities which lead to gross errors and mistakes. For instance, in Kenya, the census logistics team was constituted and officially started work after three days of its constitution. The inspection and evaluation committee for the mobile devices was also constituted late and most of the members had no prior experience in undertaking the task. 
2.	As a result of the absence or late establishment of a logistics team, several logistical issues generally get disorganized. Again, giving an example of Kenya, the Bureau had not identified a warehouse or storage facility at the headquarters in time; most suppliers of the procured materials delivered the materials late in unplanned phases and yet the quantities were voluminous and weighty which required a lot of time and energy to load. This brought a challenge with further downward distribution of materials to the training centers and enumeration areas, catalyzed by low staffing at the county and sub-county.
3.	The available fleet management can also pose challenges to the smooth running of the enumeration which in turn leads to concerns about the data quality in instances when a central team must physically respond to a problem. In Kenya, the following would have been avoided if logistics management had been prioritized early during the census planning - delays in acquiring additional fleet when initial fleet proved insufficient, coupled with frequent breakdowns of vehicles especially during rainy season and in areas with bad terrain. As well as a lack of established petrol stations and garages in some counties that could not issue electronic tax receipts, which presented accountability issues that can affect implementation of work.
4.	A raising from the limited availability of government vehicles to cover a census in most African countries, the use of non-government vehicles with private non-field-based drivers comes with their limited appreciation of field procedures and understanding of documentation as per the government guidelines. This poses a challenge in executing field work easily.

### 7.1.4	Recommendations
1.	To effectively manage census logistics, there should be strong partnerships and collaboration both within and out of the country. For instance, in Kenya, other government departments with good infrastructure assisted in movement of materials such as the disciplined forces (Army and police) for provision of transport and security. This collaboration can also continue for future censuses.
2.	The constitution of a census logistics team is a good practice but should be done early in the census planning cycle, at least one year to census enumeration and the team should be part of the pilot census. The operations at the subnational level should be given attention in terms of staffing and training on logistical operations.
3.	It is ideal to have a separate warehouse that should be ready at least 3 months before census enumeration. The material handling should be computerized and integrated into Enterprise Resource Planning systems. However, to minimize costs and in the event of a lack of proper planning, the logistics team should be in position to improvise within the available resources. For instance, Kenya did not have proper storage space at the national level, and it utilized the unfinished office space that was to be used by the library at KNBS HQ as storage space and logistics operation center. Other offices within KNBS HQ were also used as storage facilities.  
4.	The required fleet should be planned for and acquired in good time. Petrol stations should be identified and fueling mechanisms established to take care of re-fueling in all areas of the country.
