---
sidebar_position: 2
---


## 7.2 Financial Management
Funding for population and Housing censuses is the responsibility of government. The census implementing agency should present an activity-based budget to the government for consideration. All census processes including planning, cartographic mapping, enumeration, data processing, analysis and dissemination should be budgeted for in time, and a resource mobilization plan put in place. Funding constraints can cause postponements or even cancellations of a census. Additionally, securing partial funds or securing funds too late into the census preparations, can push countries to compromise their data collection, data processing and dissemination of census results. 
Some issues should be considered in ensuring good financial management for a digital census:
1.	Countries should have a high-level census steering committee and one of the main roles in their terms of reference should be resource mobilization to secure comprehensive financial support for census funding.
2.	There should be more involvement of international donors and the private sector in trying to fill a financial gap as well as obtain technical cooperation and assistance. The required funding conditions should be known a prior to avoid delays and any inconveniences.
3.	Utilize cost effective approaches to reduce costs without compromising the quality of data. Recent advances in technology can go a long way in achieving cost reductions, therefore cost-benefit analysis should be utilized during the budgeting process. For example, weighting the cost of purchasing new devices vis-a-vis leasing out.
4.	Budget development should utilize information on expenditures from the previous census that should be reviewed and adjusted accordingly. As well as ensuring transparent accounting procedures and financial management electronic systems are in place, given that a clean financial audit report adds credibility and acceptance to the census process and results.
5.	The census budget should be reviewed, and its performance evaluated against the planned phases. Expenditures should be documented to ensure that all operations are within the budget and there is efficiency and effectiveness in implementation.

### 7.2.1	Selected country experiences
Financial management was handled within the NSO with the overarching government financial management guidelines.

**Kenya**
>A sub-committee of the census TWC was established to undertake financial management for the censuses. The committee was also charged with the responsibility of mobilizing resources from various stakeholders and development partners to support implementation of various census activities and processes. The mobilized resources which were 99% from the government, were managed centrally. Regulations were developed which were shared with officers that were advanced some funds to manage the payments at County Levels. KNBS had a bank account dedicated to census at the headquarters, through which all funds’ transactions were made. At the sub national level (County) Census Bank Accounts were opened to manage payments at that level. All receipts were acknowledged through the official receipting system and payments were supported by fully authorized documentation. All funds allocated to the Counties were remitted to the County Accounts as AIE, on a regular basis. 
>Several activities undertaken during the census process were facilitated through requests advanced to members of staff. Funds approval was done in an hierarchical manner - the user requests were first approved by the Director General who forwarded the same to the Director, Corporate Services for processing. Payments that were made through the county census bank accounts included allowances (of ICT supervisors, content supervisors and enumerators, county census committee members, sub-county committee members, village elders, security personnel), payments for training venues and storage of various materials, transporting personnel and materials, among others. 
>After the census was completed, approved accounting documents were forwarded back to the Finance office at Real Towers in Nairobi and to the County Accountants’ offices. These accounting documents consisted of signed payment schedules, attendance registers and meeting minutes to account for sitting allowances paid to sub-county committee members while planning for recruitment, undertaking shortlisting, interviews, and approving the list of successful candidates and contacting them.

### 7.2.2	Lessons Learnt
Although, the financial management guidelines are developed to ease the process of handling the census funds, countries can experience challenges that disrupt work. Therefore, mechanisms should be put in place to ensure smooth operations. Kenya faced the following challenges:
-	Transfer/ unavailability of mandatory signatories to the census accounts hindered timely movement of funds to facilitate the census activities.
-	The Central Bank of Kenya set limitations on the amount of money to withdraw from the bank account, this made the payment processes long and tedious.
-	Unrealistic accounting procedures of funds were flaunted especially since some activities were overlapping and the requirement was to account immediately after every activity.
-	When making various payments to the census personnel, there were numerous cases of bank rejections due to dormant or inactive bank accounts coupled with inaccurate bank details.

## 7.2.3	Recommendations
Based on the African country experience, this handbook recommends that:
In addition to having the normal sub national level (county) bank accounts, it is important to open a bank account dedicated only to facilitating census activities at that level. In addition, include the sub national level accountants in the process of managing census funds at that level, they should undergo a thorough training on financial management and accounting of funds. They should be involved at an early stage of the census planning such as budgeting. This enables more efficient management and accountability of census funds.
