---
sidebar_position: 1
---


# 4.0 Introduction 

A pilot census is a major activity conducted during the pre-enumeration phase to comprehensively test all the aspects of census preparedness ranging from administrative, logistical, technical, and technological   infrastructure. It also tests the interface between enumeration, processing, analysis, and dissemination systems to resolve any outstanding problems. In a digital census, various tests are conducted before and after the pilot census. It is important for countries to prioritize undertaking of adequate tests of the various aspects of a census plan. The initial tests carried out during census preparations include testing of tools and instruments often referred to as census pretest and these can be several and on a small scale for different purposes.  For instance, a good questionnaire test should first evaluate the performance of a questionnaire before changes are made; then make any changes to improve its performance; and finally, evaluate the questionnaire after changes are made to find out if its performance has improved.   

**Pilots during the non-digital vs digital era**
Pilots during the non-digital census era (paper questionnaire) focussed mainly on testing the quality of the Enumeration Area (EA) maps, assessment of the enumerator’s workload and enumeration duration, overall administrative and logistics arrangements, terrain, and understanding of the questionnaire.  

In a digital census there are additional areas to be tested due to the various interfaces between systems and people. These include testing of the data collection application, its design and architecture, the internet, the equipment (handheld devices, servers etc.), the data transmission mechanisms; the readiness of the census data centre, the data integrity, data security, the data quality monitoring system/dashboard including quality of the EA maps as well as the underlying circumstances necessary to avoid equipment malfunctioning or unexpected problems in programming processes. 

**Considerations for a digital pilot census**
The main objective of a digital pilot census is to test all the aspects of the census including the ICT infrastructure for the census. Therefore, the following key considerations should be made for a successful pilot census.
-	The questionnaire design should be final , including the translations into other languages, at the time of the pilot census and any changes after the pilot should be tested. 
-	A pilot census should be conducted in conditions that are as close to the conditions that would be present during the actual enumeration as possible. For this reason, it is often recommended to be undertaken exactly one year before the planned census enumeration to conform to the expected seasonal patterns of climate and activity. 
-	Additionally, when developing a pilot census plan, consideration should be made on how the pilot sample is constituted to ensure that the selected areas provide a sufficient test of the setout objectives. Therefore, the sample should be purposively selected to include rural/urban, challenging areas, special and hard-to-count populations within a country’s context.
-	Unanticipated circumstances often arise during pilot census enumeration. Priority should be given to each detail for debriefing and making informed review of the various components being tested. Therefore, each issue identified during the pilot should be documented in a lesson learned document to be highly considered and addressed before the census. A checklist of the tests scheduled, and the recommendation should be tracked, and responsible officers assigned to fast track. Any omission or disregard of issues that look minor during the tests and pilot, may have significant effect during the actual census enumeration. Debriefing sessions should be properly structured, and documentation done systematically.
-	The census project schedule should include several field test exercises to be undertaken prior to the formal pilot census using the selected or developed devices and systems to test the reliability in the different circumstances presented in the field. As well as allowing adequate time to make any necessary improvements prior to deployment of the technologies in the field. 
-	After the pilot census, assessments should be done to test the implemented recommendations resulting from the pilot census process . It is desirable that these tests target all stages of the census, including enumeration, data processing and evaluation of results to give a clear picture of the adequacy of the entire census plan and organization.
-	A pilot census should set out clear objectives for the main areas that are to be tested including the relevant evaluation criteria, and identify data/information requirements to inform the assessment.  This may impact on how your pilot is designed. Evaluation of the pilot should be done in a timely manner as the results may necessitate an overhaul of the infrastructure and significant revisions to the PHC business model. This overhaul will call for pretesting of the revised approach at an extra cost. 
