## 12.2 Census Products
Census data is massive and can generate a wide range of statistical products. Some of the products include: published tabulations based on preliminary or final census results; Specialized or customized products requested by users such as tables from the NSO database or self-generated by users; General interest or special-interest group products; Thematic statistical or analytical reports; Methodological reports; Administrative reports; Census geographical reports including codes and classifications; Databases, including microdata and table-oriented databases; Metadata and Post Enumeration Survey Report and Special audience products which may include:  policy briefs, summary reports, thematic and analytical reports, key findings reports, fact sheets, posters, brochures and flyers, basic reports, detailed tables and spreadsheets, articles, video and social media products. 

Census products should be developed based on an agreed communication and publicity plan which clearly defines the audience based on various stakeholder groups. Stakeholder segmentation improves understanding and utilization as they respond to their needs.

With digital census, geospatial and related products are now possible since GPS coordinates for the households are picked. It is possible to estimate proximity of essential services to the population among other geospatial analysis. 

### 12.2.1 Selected country experiences
It is noted that electronic census products were produced alongside the traditional reports (which were also available electronically via various media. The production of census atlas, geo-spatial dissemination systems, interactive dashboards, use of infographics and popular version reports were innovative products in the digital census era. Below are some of the country specific census products.

