---
sidebar_position: 7
---
# Chapter 08: Census Communications - Publicity, Advocacy and Dissemination - Case Studies
[back to Handbook chapter 8](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/category/chapter-08-census-communication--publicity-advocacy-and-dissemination)

## Publicity and Advocacy
[back to Handbook section](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/chapter-08/8.2.%20Publicity%20and%20advocacy)
### Sierra Leone
>Several stakeholders were involved to build public trust in every step of the way via: Engaged CSOs for Mid-Term Census (National Elections Watch(NEW), Institute for Governance Reforms(IGR), Native Consortium, Accountability Sierra Leone, Heal Sierra Leone, Health for All Coalition etc; engaged Parliamentary Oversight Committee on Population to help in publicity, Members of Publicity Committee  also did media engagements on behalf of NSOs, All Political Parties Association of Sierra Leone (APPA) also joined them in Publicity, Nation Wide Stakeholders Engagement via town hall meetings in all districts of Sierra Leone. All Critical Voices (CSOs, Press, Political Parties) etc. were given an opportunity to monitor both the census and cartographic mapping.  hose engaged included district council chairperson’s/mayors, MDAs, Youth Groups, Women's Group, Paramount Chiefs etc.
>
>During preparation of the mid-term census, publicity was stepped up by creating new communication content that required signing of MOUs with Media Houses that translated into census hour, media engagement on flagship radio/TV Programs, as well as social media hypes & content creation for digital communication such as Websites. 
>
>New key messages were created to increase awareness about the census, educate the public about the census benefits (to them and the country), Remind them about their legal obligation and duty to take part in the census, explained to them WHAT to do, WHEN and HOW communities will be enumerated including dates, duration, ways of data collection, target population, etc. Special messages were prepared for the resistant communities e.g., ‘’If you don’t allow to be counted, you stand the risk of your communities not being planned for’’-This helped a lot to ease the resistance.
> 
>Several channels were used such as printed MTPHC Banners and deployed them across Sierra Leone, engaged Town criers with handheld megaphones, printed MTPHC T-Shirts/Wristbands/ Posters, established Census Toll Free Helpline (881) in Partnership with Telcos who sent census bulk SMSs to their customers, they brought on board CSOs/Brand influencers/ambassadors to support in the engagements.
>
>The key tools used were:  Media Engagement (Stats SL Hour-Radio and TV, Simulcast (40  Radio Stations) Country Wide, Simulcast (4 Television Stations) Country Wide, Newspaper publications –Hypes etc, Mid-Term Census countdown Screen tag/pop up on TV stations, Press Briefings, Digital Communication(Social Media & Website)); Sensitization(Meetings (Regional and District), Jingles (Different Languages), TVC and Short videos, Door to Door Announcements with Megaphones ( District and National), Public Announcement(Loud Hailer Vehicles), Census Billboards, Banners, Posters, Census Theme Song (English & Krio)).

### Kenya
>Kenya developed a publicity and advocacy strategic plan and established a respective sub-committee. A communications firm was engaged to implement the Publicity and Advocacy strategy and address any other publicity and advocacy issues during the 2019 KPHC. In Kenya, the firm was able to segment various groups and arrange for sensitization workshops with specific messages developed for them. The target audiences and their intended outcome of interventions were identified as follows: 
>
>**Target Audience and Intended Outcome of Interventions**
>
>| Target Audience                                         | The intended outcome of the intervention                                                               >                     |
>|---------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
>|     General public                                      |     To   create awareness of the importance of Census and the need to give accurate   information.     >                     |
>|     Media                                               |     To bring all   media on board to assist in disseminating accurate Census messages.                 >                     |
>|     Government   officials                              |     To   lobby their support in disseminating accurate Census messages.                                >                     |
>|     Community   leaders                                 |     To sensitize   them on the importance of Census and their role in sensitizing the public.          >                     |
>|     Civil   Society and other pressure groups           |     To   sensitize them on the Census and request for their support in disseminating   accurate Census >information.         |
>|     Religious   leaders                                 |     To sensitize   them on the importance of Census and the need for their support in   sensitizing >their congregations.    |
>|     Parliamentarians,   Governors etc.                  |     To   appeal for accurate dissemination of Census messages.                                         >                     |
>|     School Children                                     |     To educate them   on the importance of Census and solicit their support in spreading Census   >messages.                 |
>|     Individuals   with limited media access             |     To   ensure that Census messages reach even those with no media access.                            >                     |
>|     Special groups   (e.g., nomads and the homeless)    |     To ensure that   everyone is included in the Census.                                               >                    |
>
>Publicity and advocacy activities that were undertaken included:
>
>**Media:**  conducting media briefings/press releases including Editors Guild briefing and launch of census countdown as well as development and production of Information, Education and Communication (IEC) Materials (brochures, banners, fliers, posters, t-shirts, reflector jackets). Training of key census personnel on media handling; Television Advertisements, Radio Announcements and Talk Shows. Press Tour to the Production and Assembly Line and documentation of the production and assembly of the mobile tablets used in the Census and this was aired in the respective media stations.
>
>**Audio and video production:** partnering with the Ministry of Education and sponsored census theme songs and poems for the 93rd Edition of Kenya Music Festival; The KNBS choir composed, produced, and recorded audio and video which focused on the Census theme.
>
>**Roadshows:** a firm was procured to undertake publicity through roadshows using vernacular/local languages in every county.
>
>**Social media:** Call Centre and Bulk SMS Platform-Bulk SMS was used to inform the public of the period of enumeration and a Call Centre was established at the KNBS head office where all communications and complaints, questions and concerns were received through a toll-free number provided to the public. Different social media channels were used including Facebook (Kenya Stats) and Twitter (KNBStats). An integrated social media management software was procured and integrated all the social media networks into one portal for ease of maintenance and monitoring. A Census 2019 hashtag, #KenyaCensus2019, was created to share all Census related information.
>
>**World Wide Web:** A web portal was also procured and developed by the publicity firm. A generic email signature, with the Census theme and slogan, was developed and used in all KNBS emails.

## Dissemination
[back to Handbook section](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/experiences-lessons-2020/chapter-08/8.3.%20Dissemination)
### Malawi
>Malawi developed a monitoring and evaluation and crisis recovery plans for 2018 Census. Dissemination plan was proposed and developed by the NSO Publicity team that set-out specific objectives  and expected outputs; Brainstormed on theoretical framework and strategies; Compiled/documented the proposed approaches and activities; Planned the resources (Communication channels, budget, human resources, etc.); Developed timelines for realistic completion of the tasks/activities; Devised a crisis recovery plan - performed a risk analysis and identified possible “plan Bs”; and Monitoring and evaluation plan.
>
>The Dissemination plan was placed within the broader communication strategy of the 2018 Malawi Census; Regular consultation/bouncing with the PHC Communication strategy was carried out; Audience Analysis/Segmentation was done to Identify key audiences; Message identification, products design and medium/channel for reaching out to propose dissemination products, research and brainstorm on dissemination strategies/approaches, Document/develop dissemination approaches. Among the approaches used was mass communication – 
>- One of the successful approaches for reaching out to masses; Adopted to publicize census products and results through: Radio and TV programs; Press releases, Newspaper inserts, Street banners, Roll-up banners; NSO website and Data Dissemination Platform; Distribution - Libraries, Universities, District Councils/City Assemblies; Distributed Census results through memory cards – easy sharing. 
>-The second approach was: Interpersonal communication – planned working sessions, data literacy engagements with various groups including Members of Parliament, NGOs, CSOs, NSS/Line Ministries etc., social media- for updates and reminders: FB, Twitter, WhatsApp; 
>-The third approach included: Partnerships which included involvement of other organizations/institutions; Building third party and celebrity endorsements who carried along the messages from census; NSO website link on UNFPA-Malawi webpage; Advocacy/promotion activities which included making presentation during meetings, Panel discussions on census results during events (e.g. Launch of Data Dissemination Platform)
Malawi was faced with a challenge of including unplanned costs to cover DSA and high professional fees to engage communication experts.

### Ghana
>The Ghana 2021 Population and Housing Census (PHC) dissemination phase aimed at sustained engagement with data users and proposed presentation of census statistics in interactive and user-friendly ways to promote uptake of the data over the next decade; The 2021 PHC dissemination activities  aimed to: Communicate the results of the 2021 PHC, Highlight the resourcefulness of the data; Build public trust in the accuracy and quality of the data collected; Conduct consultations with data users to assess their needs; Present statistics in interactive and user-friendly ways to promote uptake of the data; Conduct sustained intercensal activities for continuity and maintain public awareness of the importance of the census; Share lessons learned from the 2021 PHC with the global community.
>
>The Modes of Stakeholders Engagement included:  Contextual interviews with key stakeholders; Publication of release calendar; Briefing of high-level government officials and census committees; Publication and dissemination of print and online reports; Publication of summary sheets and policy briefs; Interactive census results dashboard; Use of WhatsApp platforms (priority on platforms with high-level officials such as Ministers, CEOs,) for dissemination of graphics and short videos; Email updates to mailing list; Infographics, videographic and data visualizations; Interactive maps; Dissemination seminars/webinars with data users; Capacity building of data users to make data-driven decisions; Statistical awareness and educational programmes using traditional and new media; Blogs and podcasts; Statistical literacy course for journalists; Development of data product souvenirs (posters, calendars, notepads, novelty items, etc.); Statistical outreach activities and public policy advocacy; Publication and dissemination of annual population fact sheet; Development of a statistics for schools programme to encourage the use of census data ; Institution of an annual census awareness day to highlight census statistics; Documentation of the ways that census data is used for decision-making to be incorporated into the publicity, education, and advocacy campaign for the next census; Using Dissemination to Sustain Census Interest: Collaborating with Statistics Denmark to establish online databank; Launch of small business hub on census website; Post-release stakeholder data user seminars/webinars (MDAs, MMDCEs, private sector, media, CSOs, religious institutions, educational institutions, etc.
>Release of thematic reports; Release of analytical reports; post-release media engagement; Census awareness day (annual); Launch of statistics in schools programme; Publication of annual statistical bulletin; Launch of share your census story campaign (in collaboration with Statistics Denmark. Dissemination – “Targeted Users”: Policy makers; Public administration; Academia/Researchers; Businesses; Development partners; Librarians; CSOs; Students; General public.

### Kenya 
>In Kenya, dissemination involved packaging, distributing, and making available census results in the most effective manner, as well as encouraging wide usage of the data. Data dissemination processes were guided by the dissemination policy which addressed the principles, conditions, technical aspects, and the way KNBS disseminates statistics to users for research and other purposes. 
>
>The Dissemination process utilized included: Public launch of the census results; Publishing basic reports and monographs from the census data; Organizing media forums to share the results; Holding National and County dissemination workshops; Posting results on KNBS website and data portal; production of digital storage media- DVDs, CDs and USB drives; Participating in public platforms for exhibitions e.g. Agricultural Society of Kenya shows; Library – The KNBS library stores publications as reference materials for researchers and the general public; Use of social media—twitter, you-tube,  face book handle to share key highlights; Engagement of the media through media workshop briefs/breakfast meeting briefs; TV and Radio to share the key highlights. 
>
>KNBS tried to involve all stakeholders in census data dissemination planning, especially engagement with the Office of the President to give releases legitimacy and wider coverage. It is important to encourage structures that allow the engagement of key stakeholders from the start of the Census process. KNBS was obliged to release census data or grant access to the data when it is satisfied that all reasonable steps have been considered to safeguard confidentiality of the respondents taking into considerations the country’s legal framework on freedom of information, data protection, and ethical considerations; KNBS shares data/information to individuals or institutions after official release. Kenya was faced with inadequate resources to undertake disseminations to the lower sub national levels.

### Egypt
>The 2017 census results were published via a platform on the CAPMAS website. The platform disseminates the data from their Census. CAPMAS set up a Geoportal for GIS data from the Census. It used Google Analytics to monitor who are using their Census products. CAPMAS issues an annual schedule of publications, bulletins, indicators, statistical data, they are released and disseminated using various tools that include hard copy publications; soft copy on CD, press statements, Press releases, workshops & Conferences; Fax and Flyers. 
>
>CAPMAS was eager to provide users with the updated data upon their completion, so priority was given to the electronic publication of the preliminary results of the census until the results were published on the official website of CAPMAS. Website Analysis was done using Google Analytics specifically the usage of Google Analytics on the Website Analysis such as Wherefrom (Users’ login, total of users, their category such as: country, language, and detailed data page on views).

### Zimbabwe
>Zimbabwe produced 8 preliminary reports on a modular basis to provide quick feedback to the 2022 PHC users. Data on census preliminary reports was supposed to be used during 2023 National budget preparation and delimitation of constituency boundaries. Hybrid dissemination workshops were held both physically and virtually using Zoom and Team platforms. Subject matter discussions were also held. The census results were also presented to two Cabinet meetings. The reports were also uploaded on the website www.zimstat.co.zw and Census page on the ODP was created. Social Media was used like: Live streaming of presentation of results on Facebook (Zimstat), Twitter posts and updates (@zimstat), WhatsApp; Electronic and Print media: Invited journalists to attend dissemination workshops, Interviews in local languages Shona and Ndebele held; various Infographics.  Some of the products that were generated included: Census National Report; 10 Census Provincial Profile Reports; Vital Statistics Report from 2022 PHC data; 16 Census Thematic Reports building on 2012 experience; Census Atlas; and Thematic maps. 
>
>The following dissemination methods will be used for the outstanding products: posters, leaflets, wall charts, population datasheets, flyers and brochures will be produced and distributed in all the provinces and districts; Round table discussions and seminars for thematic reports; Media briefs, media releases and fact sheets for all the products. To allow for greater access, the 2022 Population and Housing Census dataset will be added onto the REDATAM-based census database systems which are currently uploaded onto the ZIMSTAT website (www.zimstat.co.zw). This will allow users to generate user-defined tables, graphs and maps using the 2022 Population and Housing Census data. Statistical awareness and educational programs on the ways to access, interpret and use census information will be done for effective outreach. Partnerships with the media to improve the wider dissemination and understanding of statistical information from census.

### Mozambique 
>Mozambique engaged various stakeholders (political parties, ministry's, medias, NGOs, Donors, etc) from questionnaire development stage to dissemination stage. A dissemination plan was elaborated and implemented in accordance with stakeholders’ segmentation in which they grouped the users into various groups, identified the purpose for which they use the statistics produced, and the format that would be most useful to a given group. 
>
>The groups included: Universities (students/professors) and researchers; Development Cooperation Agencies, donors, international NGOs, and the United Nations; children and teenagers; Entrepreneurs, Banks, and Private Sector; Government; media; Politicians; Statistics Producers (INE, Bank of Mozambique, SEN members); People with special needs / people with disabilities; General public (using an inclusive methodology); Civil society, NGOs and religious institutions. INE mapped suitable formats for each user group and designed a product for each segment, including school children (e.g. comics for the Youth). 
>
>In the last census (2007) the thematic studies were written by NSO staff in collaboration with local universities. Differently, with 2017 census the approach was to use consultants. This imposed challenge on data use by consultants that require deep involvement of INE staff;  When users are involved, making data available, explaining how to use and interpret the data, they respond positively; (example, NSO stabilized a partnership with media association, reining the media and stabilizing flexible communication channels such as WhatsApp; NSO created journalistic award; In response: all media refer to the NSO when talking about statistics; they constantly request for data and clarifications in the WhatsApp group; weekly they publish something about statistics; The average visits increased from 171,207  (2017 and 2018) to  288,721 (2020 and 2021)

### Eswatini 
>The first Census in Swaziland was conducted in 1956 and since then, following the United Nations recommendations, the Government has kept up to the 10 years schedule. The last census to be conducted was in 2017 census. The census preliminary report was published within four months (September 2017) after enumeration, the thematic reports were done after 30 months (December 2019) after enumeration and the population projections was done in August 2020 (more than 3 years). These reports were printed and availed in soft copy on USB flash disks, and on the Central Statistics Office and Government website. Each report was disseminated as soon as they were published, through stakeholder workshops and electronically for individual user requests. 

[back to Handbook chapter 8](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/category/chapter-08-census-communication--publicity-advocacy-and-dissemination)



