---
sidebar_position: 2
---
## 2.1 Development of the census proposal

A census proposal documents how a country intends to execute all the PHC processes. It includes the methodology to be used, implementation structure, budget, workplan and information on how each activity will be implemented. The census proposal is also referred to as a census master plan.

Ideally, planning for a PHC should start immediately after completion of the previous census. This should start with evaluation and development of an administrative report that puts together the lessons learnt from one census and recommendations for improvement. The use of knowledge management tools and techniques is thus beneficial for preserving institutional memory so that lessons learned are used for better management of future census planning and execution. Additionally, benchmarking lessons from countries that have already undertaken their digital census is a critical input to development of a census proposal.

Census planning should be guided by the UN P&R for PHC, Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics, as well as the national statistical legislation and national statistical code of ethics. Given

the long-life span of census operations, planning should be flexible to incorporate changes as they occur. A census plan should provide details for each of the census phases:

1. Pre-enumeration operations such as mapping, publicity, questionnaire development, testing and piloting.

2. Field enumeration

3. Post enumeration such as data processing, data analysis and dissemination, evaluation, and post-enumeration survey.

During planning for each census phase, the following issues should be put into consideration:

**1. Legal framework** - The population and housing census needs to be legally authorized, and the implementing agency must be assigned with legal authority (e.g., through an act) for planning, organization, and implementation of census operations. The legal framework needs to be clearly understood and incorporated into census planning. 

**2. Funds commitment** – Government commitment on the level of funding should be sought early enough in the cycle so that the other aspects of the census plan can proceed smoothly. These commitments should be monitored to confirm availability at the time when it is needed, especially for the most expensive phases of mapping and enumeration.

**3. Logistical support** – the plan should seek for availability of existing support structures from both government, private sector, and development partners to inform the planning process. Services may be provided in kind or a subsidized rate, all this should be known early.

**4. Stakeholder analysis**- Identifying stakeholders is a critical starting point for determining dependencies when planning the census. Good and effective communication with those stakeholders is essential to ensure that each phase of the census meets the needs of the other, and that the resources of the statistical agency are used most effectively. Stakeholders at the planning stage should be identified from: within the census programme, within the statistical agency, external stakeholders within the country, stakeholders outside the country and the community at large. The development process entails stakeholder engagements to ensure it is complete and that the needs of data users are carefully considered.

**5. Aspects of the Plan** – For each phase of the plan, the following must be well thought out and documented: objectives, activities, tasks, milestones, and risk management plan.

**6. Monitoring plan** – a plan to monitor the census project plans and management of information flows is an important part of census planning. It is advisable to develop a Gantt chart of integrated schedules, key milestones, and production operations. There should be a feedback loop that compares actual results with the plan and assesses the impact of any deviations from target dates and costs. The most important components to track are the calendar time for completing a task; resource usage per task; cost per task; milestones met. The plan should highlight what to review and the reporting mechanisms.

**7. Administrative and geographic areas** for which census data will be reported and disseminated is one of the first decisions in census planning because it has time and cost implications. When data are not required at the lowest level of detail, other statistical sources/ methodologies more cost-effective than censuses should be adopted.

**8. Capacity building** - any training that is required for any phase should be completed early enough so that those benefiting from the training can play an active role in census planning and operations. Ensure that the training needs are identified early in the census planning process and that required funds are included in the census budget.

**9. Use of technology** – all agreed technological specifications should be agreed in principle because they affect all phases of the census plan and should be integral to the planning process.

**10. Contracting out** – the need to contract out some services should be an integral part of the plan and in the interest of ensuring efficiency and filling an in‐house expertise deficiency. The decision should then inform the plan.

### 2.1.1	Selected country experiences 
As part of the census planning process, all countries considered stakeholder involvement, availability of logistical support as well as the existing legal framework for census implementation. In addition, ensured to have a national declaration/launch of the census. Below are some highlights of selected countries experiences:

>**Kenya**
>The planning process started in 2015 (four years to the census date). The proposal provided a road map and detailed plan on how to effectively operationalize all three phases of the census processes: the pre-enumeration phase, enumeration phase and post-enumeration phase. The proposal was developed internally by the KNBS staff. The drafted proposal went through vigorous revisions based on inputs from various census experts, stakeholders and other government departments before finalization and eventual approval of the document two years later in May 2017. After finalization of the census project proposal, a cabinet memo was developed to forward the proposal to the cabinet for information and approval.
>
>The approval paved the way for gazettement of the 2019 Census process to start in November 2018 and this gave the process a legal backing. The census was implemented within the provisions of the Kenya Constitution, 2010 and the Statistics Act No. 4 of 2006.<br>

>**Namibia**
>Various proposals were developed on how to conduct a cost-effective census, such as loaning of tablets from other NSOs; usage of Government vehicles for census activities; implementing the census mapping activities in two phases (Pilot Enumeration Areas; the remainder of Enumeration Areas). Development of the field operations workplan was based on three phases (Pilot Census, Census Enumeration and Post- Enumeration Survey).
>
>Internal stakeholders’ workshops were conducted to create awareness and ownership among the Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) and to solicit inputs on the census project documents. Given the need to use schools for census training venues, the ministry of education was consulted to adjust the school calendar to cater for census dates.
>
>Fourteen Regional Stakeholders’ engagement workshops were held two years in advance (in 2019) to create awareness about the planned 2021 Population and Housing Census. Consultative meetings with line ministries; development partners; private entities were also held to mobilize for resources (funds, tablets, vehicles). 
>
>With the support of the Namibia Statistics Agency Board and Minister, the census proposal was submitted to the Cabinet Committee on Treasury through the census structure. In addition, several updates/briefing notes were submitted to the Minister of Economics and Planning to further brief His Excellency the President on the census undertaking.

>**Sierra Leone**
>Development of the census proposal employed an inclusive approach, which underscored the benefits of coordination and collaboration between the governance structures of the census project. 
>
>The NSO operations Act provided the legal authority for the census undertaking which is in harmony with the objectives and strategy of the census programme. A Legal Notice was published in accordance with the census Act. His excellency the president proclaimed the census undertaking. 
>
>The plan targeted to be highly responsiveness to National Development Goals to get popular approval and national ownership as well as ensuring alignment to the Sustainable Development Goals.
>
>Preparations started with a review of the lessons learnt from the previous census to inform the plan while avoiding the 2015 PHC pitfalls for a smoother operation to ensure a more cost-effective approach that was inclusive, meaningful, practical, creative, and timely.  
>

### 2.1.2	Recommendations  
1.	The census planning should start several years in advance, utilize stakeholder engagements, and eventually obtain the political will to implement.
2.	A census plan should not be static but rather dynamic to accommodate any changes that may occur at any of the phases.
