---
sidebar_position: 3
---

## 2.2	Development of census budget and workplan
As indicated in the UN P & R for PHC para. 2.73 - 2.81, a population census undertaking is usually one of the largest and costliest statistical activities that governments and their national statistical offices undertake. It is recommended that all census operations, including planning, cartography, enumeration, processing, analysis, and dissemination, be budgeted from the beginning, and efforts be made to mobilize the required funds. The budget development process begins during development of the census project proposal. 

Some important budgeting and planning best practices  include among others:

- The census budget plans should be in line with the Nation’s public finance management framework with consistent regulations. 
- Adopt a performance-based framework that ensures that resources are allocated to specific activities within the census phases and are measurable.
- Develop key budget performance indicators and undertake periodic analysis of budgets against actual cash inflows and expenditures as the census phases progress. 
- A census budget should contain both planning and reporting structures within the implementing agency given that often the resources are from multiple sources.
- Budget plans must be updated as necessary for it to reflect the current situation and for it to constantly remain relevant and useful. This is necessary given that the overall census plan is also flexible and not static. This is especially true after the pilot census implementation that may warrant major changes with implications on the budget.
- Have a resource mobilization plan in place to be implemented by the census steering committee.

### 2.2.1	Selected country experiences 
It is noted that the budget and work plan development should be consultative both within and outside the implementing agency, and it should be drawn for each of the census phases. Below are some highlights of selected countries experiences:
**Kenya**
> 
>Subject matter specialists worked on individual budgets which were later merged and discussed. After the first draft, consultations were made internally, and further improvements were made through engagement of various stakeholders before submitting to cabinet for approval. 
>
**Namibia**

>The budget was developed internally and later presented to potential donors and development partners for possible funding opportunities. The highest budget drivers were census mapping activities; CAPI technology devices; vehicle rentals and remuneration of field personnel (due to an increase in Enumeration Areas). The budget was revised on several occasions due to inadequate funding from the government. 

### 2.2.2	Lessons Learnt
A digital census requires multiple testing of the technological requirements. Some of the countries did not factor these tests in their budgets and plans early enough, they only realized the need for additional tests after or before implementing the pilot census. This calls for exhaustively outlining the census technical proposal to achieve quality data and inform the budgeting process in time.

### 2.2.3	Recommendations
It is desirable to engage stakeholders and census experts to review the budget for support and completeness. Governments should be able to mobilize and avail adequate resources for the census undertaking.  In addition, countries need to avoid over reliance on donor funding. Countries should ensure timely disbursement of funds to avoid delays in implementation of activities.
