---
sidebar_position: 4
---

## 13.3 Compilation approach

The checklist is grounded in the values of the UN P &R of PHC, Rev 3 as well as the application of project management principles to each phase as an effective business practice. Adopted a project management approach based on the UN Handbook on census management-section II B 3: Developing project plans Para. 2.32 -2.70. Adopted a hierarchical framework to a census project starting with the broad census phases each showing the corresponding component activities and tasks while highlighting the key milestones as shown in figure 1.

**Figure 1: Hierarchical framework adopted to achieve a census project.**

https://github.com/tech-acs/e-census-handbook/blob/master/docs/Figure%201%20Hierarchical%20framework%20adopted%20to%20achieve%20a%20census%20project.png


 
The approach used to arrange the activities and tasks is in sync with the Generic Statistical Business Process Model (GSBPM) and a project approach in each phase. It therefore presents each phase (critical step) with its corresponding key activities and tasks from beginning to end and in chronology of achievement of census milestones (see annex table). Figure 2 shows the critical census steps as outlined in the UNFPA Step-By-Step reference guide (Gant Chart) and their alignment to the GSBPM and the three census phases.

**Figure 2: Relationship between census phases, the GSBPM and critical census steps**

https://github.com/tech-acs/e-census-handbook/blob/master/docs/Figure%202%20Relationship%20between%20census%20phases%2C%20the%20GSBPM%20and%20critical%20census%20steps.png

*GSBPM is Generic Statistical Business Process Model

ECA is automating this checklist to clearly show the interlinkages between phases and activities.
Note: The checklist is indicative and by no means exhaustive.  It is intended to illustrate how the details of the census-related activities could be arranged and documented for implementation.  Member States can adapt to their national circumstances but should ensure that the plan captures the full range of the census process – from beginning to end. Member states should use the information in this toolkit that is relevant to their country situation. Census planning should be dynamic and flexible, the implementing agency will need to react to changes in the environment as they occur and hence adapt the checklist.
