---
sidebar_position: 2
---


## 9.1 ICT infrastructure 
Census ICT infrastructure constitutes the physical and virtual components that are used to facilitate the collection, processing, storage, management, and communication of census data. It includes various hardware, software, network, and data resources that are necessary for supporting information and communication technology services. ICT infrastructure encompasses:

**-	Network infrastructure:** composed of switches, routers, firewalls, and other networking devices, as well as the cabling and connectivity that enable data to be transmitted across the network.

**-	Data center infrastructure:** facilities used for housing ICT infrastructure, including servers, storage devices, as well as providing power, cooling, and physical security.

**-	Communication infrastructure:** including the telecommunications networks and services, such as wired and wireless communication networks, internet service providers, and telecommunications equipment; and

**-	End-user devices and peripherals:** including desktop computers, laptops, mobile devices, printers, scanners, and other devices used by end-users to access and interact with ICT resources.

The UN guidelines on the use of electronic data collection technologies in population and housing censuses provide details on how to effectively plan and utilize ICT infrastructure.

**ICT Infrastructure during the non-digital vs digital era**
During the non-digital census era data collection was mostly done through paper questionnaire. Census before the 2020 round in African countries were mostly based on paper questionnaire. Once the interview has been conducted, the data had to be keyed into a computer system mostly through manual means.  The main technological focus during this era was the data processing infrastructure which includes the server computers and data processing software. 

In a digital census, dramatic developments have been witnessed in data collection with the advent of smartphones and tablets, as well as Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) tools. Though not commonly practiced in Africa, web-based interviewing is also becoming the norm in developed countries, with minimal involvement of enumerators.

**Key considerations**

When a country is planning to use electronic data collection methods, they should consider the following factors: institutional factors; technological factors; operational factors; social, cultural, environmental factors; and economic factors.  Additionally, countries should have comprehensive ICT management guidelines/strategy to guide in planning and management of the IT component of the census process. The strategy should include detailed information on the required infrastructure (servers, network, tablet specifications, data transmission criteria, data security, data backup mechanisms, required ICT skills, workplan and budget, etc.).
To effectively implement a digital census, there is need to have a robust ICT infrastructure to support the process as highlighted in the UNSD guidelines on the use of electronic data collection methods in PHCs. Availability of ICT infrastructure will vary from country to country depending on several factors like: vastness, network coverage, population size, number of EAs among others. 

### 9.1.1 Selected Country experiences

Most of the African countries that conducted a census in the 2020 round had it digitally done. It is eminent that it was critical for countries to study available ICT infrastructure and make key considerations in deciding to undertake a digital census. It is also noted that local mobile companies provided internet services, tablets were either procured locally or supported to acquire from another country, technology was used throughout the census business process among others. NSOs that had a vision to undertake a digital census made varied considerations for ICT technology as shown below:

**Kenya**
>The choice to use mobile technology for data collection was based on the existing extensive of mobile technology usage in Kenya, wide network coverage, reduced price of owning mobile devices, and improved ICT literacy levels among other reasons.
>
>Android tablets and phones were chosen due to their affordability and availability of platforms for mobile application development tools. Mobile technologies were used for cartographic mapping, pilot tested and used in the main census enumeration.
>
>Two local universities premised on their proven experience in successful delivery of tablets were used to assemble the mobile devices and installed census software and related census files. 

**Sierra Leone**
>Procured the Enumeration Area Pad software 4.0 license and satellite imagery with recent footprint of all structures and other features. Data was downloaded via google cloud from the mapping assistants in the field to the respective District Offices using onscreen digitization of delineated Enumeration Areas using ARCGIS Mapping software tool. 
>
>Each technological instrument intended for use in census data collection activity was available during the preparation period, and fully tested with other related applications. 
The local mobile companies provided the internet services at an agreed fee and this played a vital role working with servers at Statistics Sierra Leone Head Quarters to aid transfer of data directly from the field to main offices.

**Botswana**
>Acquisition of tablets was done through a local procurement and donation from UNFPA Botswana.  

### 9.1.2 Lessons learnt.
In some countries, the effects of COVID-19 pandemic led to delays in mobilization of resources hence inadequate funding and late procurement of census equipment. While other countries failed to follow the correct equipment specifications and skipped some of the guidelines for electronic census data collection. It is advisable that during planning:
a)	Avoid late procurement of census equipment like servers and tablets delays configuration time and testing which in turn is rushed at the last-minute warranting more human and financial resources. This may affect effective and efficient implementation of a digital census. In the case of Kenya and Botswana, there was interference with census processes resulting from devices. Kenya had some tablets malfunctioning due to sim cards popping out during enumeration thus interfering and slowing down the processes.
b)	All relevant staff need to be aware of how the tools and applications are defined for full understanding of the process and the application. This will lead to improvement in the gathering of high-quality data and the field staff’s awareness of how these monitoring or consistency check applications work. In the case of Sierra Leone’s all tools and applications created were excellent for efficient data collection, however, few personnel were knowledgeable about trouble shooting aspects.
c)	To stick to the recommended equipment specifications. In Botswana, the procurement processes did not follow the correct specifications because the suppliers were not able to provide the required quantities according to specifications. Therefore, whatever was available in the market was taken on to augment without really considering tested specifications. Hence, four types of tablets were used in the census enumeration: Lenovo Tab M8, Lenovo Tab M10, RCT Enkulu, Ditec and the other two device types did not perform well in; GPS functionality, storage capacity (mbtiles), battery life, and this had an impact on enumeration and data quality.

### 9.1.3 Recommendations
Based on the selected country experiences and the lessons learned regarding availability and selection of ICT infrastructure, the following recommendations were made:
a)	Countries should engage the local mobile phone companies to provide internet services at an agreed fairer fee. This plays a vital role in transfer of data directly from the field to the offices to avoid multiple layers of data transfer and possible data loss. This also allows for real-time data flow monitoring and quality assurance.
b)	Procurement of census servers should be done well on time (at least 6 months before census enumeration). This should give the data management team enough time to interact and familiarize them with the servers by having adequate simulations and test runs.
c)	Countries are encouraged as much as possible to use tablets of the same specifications to allow for uniform trouble shooting and consistency in data transmission, security etc. Consideration of which devices to be procured for use in the Main Census should be given to those that have been put to test during the pilot exercise to avoid the experience of Botswana.
d)	All software and systems intended to be used during census enumeration should be thoroughly tested during the pilot census before they are deployed for use on a large scale to avoid interference in training and census enumeration. The CAPI application should be developed by a large team to mitigate unforeseeable eventuality. 
