# 8.1	Communication
Communication is key for successful implementation of a population and housing census. During implementation of preparatory activities, effective communication is key to mobilize the required support from all the stakeholders. During census planning, adequate resources for census communication activities should be mobilized. After census, communication of the results to the various stakeholders in the right format and time is key. 

A census communication strategy should be developed. The strategy should have a description of the statement of purpose; current situation (SWOT, PEST, and good practices); organizational and communications objectives; identifying stakeholders; key messages; key communications methods; work plan: outcomes and key performance indicators; and evaluation plan. 

To successfully implement a census, it is necessary to map and engage all stakeholders during all census phases (Pre-enumeration, enumeration, and post-enumeration) to build public trust in every step, increase use of census products and avoid resistance during enumeration and dissemination of census products.

**Census Stakeholders**
Census implementing agencies must understand the data needs of all stakeholders, segment the users, develop appropriate tailored messages, and identify appropriate communication channels. This raises awareness, modernizes communication, and put in place mechanisms to increase access and use of census products. When planning for stakeholders’ engagement there is need to identify:
-	Who to talk to?
-	What do we want to say to them?
-	Who should say it?
-	How should we say it?
-	When to talk to them?
The characteristics used to segment an audience will vary between countries, however a quantitative approach to audience segmentation is preferred. The process can also be applied through qualitative consideration of the subgroups found in a population. 

Some of the stakeholders that should be reached out to include: Government departments and ministries, universities and other research institutions, the private sector, organizations (or individuals) representing the economic, social, educational, cultural or other sectors of a country, representatives of special groups –ethnic communities, religious and faith groups, persons with disabilities, etc., donors/development partners,  NGOs, sub-national government authorities and institutions, civil society organizations like disability society, political leaders, media/journalists, businessmen, the public, investors, faith-based organizations, other statistical organizations, schools, other statisticians who use census data, students etc.  

**Communication channels**
For effective communication, appropriate communication channels and messages for specific stakeholders needs to be identified and used.  Some of the communication channels that have been used include: 
-	**Print:** These include reports, policy briefs, brochures, articles, newspaper supplements, posters, fact sheets, wall charts and fliers. 
-	**Radio:** adverts, interviews in studio and recorded interviews. 
-	**Television:** adverts, Live coverage of national launches, interviews in studio, recorded interviews and talk shows. 
-	**Digital Media:** Website; dissemination portal.  
-	**Social media:** Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, and LinkedIn.
-	**Mass Media:** Press releases, press briefings and press conferences.
-	**In person engagements:** Participatory seminars, Workshops, Breakfast meetings, Public Barazas / Launches, public speeches, road shows, webinars. 
-	**Interactive Media:** Podcasts, short video clips, memes. 
