## 8.2	Publicity and advocacy
Effective publicity and advocacy results in high data quality as the campaigns encourage people to open their doors for enumerators and promotes understanding of the content and purpose of the census. Additionally, it reduces the cost of census enumeration because the increased understanding and reception to interviewers reduces the time per interview and nonresponse. The specific objectives of census publicity and advocacy include: 
-	To create awareness among the public on the conduct of Population and Housing Census (including the date, methodology and questions to be asked). 
-	To promote public understanding of the significance of census data as a veritable tool for socio-economic planning. 
-	To neutralize possible misconceptions, suspicion and tensions that could be generated while planning and conducting the census. 
-	To solicit the understanding and cooperation of the general public in all census activities.
-	To solicit the support of all stakeholders, influential/pressure groups (e.g., women, youth groups, persons with disability groups) and civil society groups in the conduct of census enumeration.
-	To promote wider utilization of the census products.

A document outlining the strategic plan for communication, publicity and advocacy should be developed. The strategic document should contain a list of stakeholders; target communication channels/media to be used; implementation plan for the various activities; collaborations; required resources; budget for the implementation; a monitoring and evaluation plan. 

### 8.2.1	Selected Country Experiences
**Statistics Sierra Leone**
>Several stakeholders were involved to build public trust in every step of the way via: Engaged CSOs for Mid-Term Census (National Elections Watch(NEW), Institute for Governance Reforms(IGR), Native Consortium, Accountability Sierra Leone, Heal Sierra Leone, Health for All Coalition etc; engaged Parliamentary Oversight Committee on Population to help in publicity, Members of Publicity Committee  also did media engagements on behalf of NSOs, All Political Parties Association of Sierra Leone (APPA) also joined them in Publicity, Nation Wide Stakeholders Engagement via town hall meetings in all districts of Sierra Leone. All Critical Voices (CSOs, Press, Political Parties) etc. were given an opportunity to monitor both the census and cartographic mapping.  hose engaged included district council chairperson’s/mayors, MDAs, Youth Groups, Women's Group, Paramount Chiefs etc.
>
>During preparation of the mid-term census, publicity was stepped up by creating new communication content that required signing of MOUs with Media Houses that translated into census hour, media engagement on flagship radio/TV Programs, as well as social media hypes & content creation for digital communication such as Websites. 
>
>New key messages were created to increase awareness about the census, educate the public about the census benefits (to them and the country), Remind them about their legal obligation and duty to take part in the census, explained to them WHAT to do, WHEN and HOW communities will be enumerated including dates, duration, ways of data collection, target population, etc. Special messages were prepared for the resistant communities e.g., ‘’If you don’t allow to be counted, you stand the risk of your communities not being planned for’’-This helped a lot to ease the resistance.
> 
>Several channels were used such as printed MTPHC Banners and deployed them across Sierra Leone, engaged Town criers with handheld megaphones, printed MTPHC T-Shirts/Wristbands/ Posters, established Census Toll Free Helpline (881) in Partnership with Telcos who sent census bulk SMSs to their customers, they brought on board CSOs/Brand influencers/ambassadors to support in the engagements.
>
>The key tools used were:  Media Engagement (Stats SL Hour-Radio and TV, Simulcast (40  Radio Stations) Country Wide, Simulcast (4 Television Stations) Country Wide, Newspaper publications –Hypes etc, Mid-Term Census countdown Screen tag/pop up on TV stations, Press Briefings, Digital Communication(Social Media & Website)); Sensitization(Meetings (Regional and District), Jingles (Different Languages), TVC and Short videos, Door to Door Announcements with Megaphones ( District and National), Public Announcement(Loud Hailer Vehicles), Census Billboards, Banners, Posters, Census Theme Song (English & Krio)).

**Kenya**
Kenya developed a publicity and advocacy strategic plan and established a respective sub-committee. A communications firm was engaged to implement the Publicity and Advocacy strategy and address any other publicity and advocacy issues during the 2019 KPHC. In Kenya, the firm was able to segment various groups and arrange for sensitization workshops with specific messages developed for them. The target audiences and their intended outcome of interventions were identified as follows: 

**Target Audience and Intended Outcome of Interventions**






Publicity and advocacy activities that were undertaken included: 
**-	Media:**  conducting media briefings/press releases including Editors Guild briefing and launch of census countdown as well as development and production of Information, Education and Communication (IEC) Materials (brochures, banners, fliers, posters, t-shirts, reflector jackets). Training of key census personnel on media handling; Television Advertisements, Radio Announcements and Talk Shows. Press Tour to the Production and Assembly Line and documentation of the production and assembly of the mobile tablets used in the Census and this was aired in the respective media stations.
**-	Audio and video production:** partnering with the Ministry of Education and sponsored census theme songs and poems for the 93rd Edition of Kenya Music Festival; The KNBS choir composed, produced, and recorded audio and video which focused on the Census theme.
**-	Roadshows:** a firm was procured to undertake publicity through roadshows using vernacular/local languages in every county.  
**-	Social media:** Call Centre and Bulk SMS Platform-Bulk SMS was used to inform the public of the period of enumeration and a Call Centre was established at the KNBS head office where all communications and complaints, questions and concerns were received through a toll-free number provided to the public. Different social media channels were used including Facebook (Kenya Stats) and Twitter (KNBStats). An integrated social media management software was procured and integrated all the social media networks into one portal for ease of maintenance and monitoring. A Census 2019 hashtag, #KenyaCensus2019, was created to share all Census related information. 
**-	World Wide Web:** A web portal was also procured and developed by the publicity firm. A generic email signature, with the Census theme and slogan, was developed and used in all KNBS emails. 

### 8.2.2	Lessons Learnt
1. Although census publicity and advocacy are carried out, there are challenges that may arise and should be anticipated in the design of the publicity and advocacy strategy, such as: 
-	Opposition political parties formally pronouncing a boycott of the census leading to resistance and rejection of enumerators in opposition party stronghold areas. 
-	Funding challenges, for instance in Sierra Leone the main donor (World Bank) withdrew funding during the main enumeration.
2. Delays in delivery of some publicity materials to the sub national levels arising from lack of clear guidelines and procedures for carrying out publicity and advocacy at these levels; inappropriate planning. For example, in Kenya, the use of caravans/roadshows was not effective in some areas. The caravans did not cover some parts of the counties and arrived late; therefore, their regular monitoring is important to ensure the effectiveness of the publicity. 

### 8.2.3	Recommendations
1.	A comprehensive publicity and advocacy plan should be put in place to target all populations especially the rural or urban residents, residents of formal or informal housing, participants in the formal or informal economy, fully literate, semi-literate, and illiterate groups, speakers of minority languages, recent internal or international migrants, remotely situated or nomadic populations. In addition, special messages should be tailored for the resistant communities.
2.	Publicity for the census should commence from the onset of the census process including during cartographic mapping and pre-enumeration listing, to the end.  This will help build the confidence of the public over time and mitigate issues such as fake advertisements. During the census preparatory phase, the implementing agencies need to undertake a wide publicity and advocacy campaign to inform the public of the census and to explain its purpose and hence mobilize support and participation. 
3.	The engagement of a communications firm to lead the process of publicity and advocacy plays a major role in getting the public and leaders to support the census. It is more impactful if the firm is brought on board early. A media firm should carry out road shows rather than the NSO as a good strategy for publicity.
4	Procurement of publicity materials for the census should be finalized and distributed at least three months before the enumeration period. All the publicity activities should have adequate materials.
5	It is important to train all persons that will be involved in the publicity campaigns to ensure uniformity and consistency. The media engagement training should be extended to more key personnel especially the CSOs to ensure they pass the correct message to the public.
6	There should be strong political will built for the census to handle cases of shortage of funds or any other unexpected challenges for instance in Sierra Leone when the funder withdrew, Government came in to cover the funding gap.
