---
sidebar_position: 3
---


## 8.3	Dissemination
“A census is not complete until the information collected is made available to users in a form suited to their needs.” United Nations Statistics Division (2017), Principles and Recommendations for Population and Housing Censuses -Revision 3, pp 124; para. 3.240. 

It is a pre requisite to develop a census dissemination strategic document that should include: (1) products to be developed, (2) the media of dissemination, (3) metadata to aid in the interpretation of the results, (4) confidentiality and privacy measures, (5 ) assessment of the required technologies to meet user needs, (6) dissemination policy, (7) quality assurance in terms of accuracy and timeliness, (8) required financial and human resources. 
Several dissemination platforms were used by countries such as: social media Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Interactive Database, Open access Free Download Facility, FTP, Geography Products, Map Books, ATLAS, Interactive Maps like Web Feature Service (WFS) and Web Map Service (WMS), E-Government, Mobile Technology (SMS). Other dissemination channels that can be considered include: 

**1. Newspaper -** newspapers-print and online publications, straight news articles, editorials, opinion pieces, or lifestyle features, can cover issues in depth including graphs, charts etc.

**2. Press releases  -** designed to provide information to the media about a data release or a new data product. 

**3. Television and radio  -** coverage in news, current affairs, talk shows, or as part of regular programming. Can be live coverage or pre-recorded, wide reach, can be in local language. Radio has an advantage of low cost. In preparing for a media interview, consider the following:
-	Which media?
-	 What is the topic/angle?
-	Who is the reporter?
-	Will the interview be live or recorded?
-	Where is it?
-	When is it?
-	When will the story be published/aired?
  
**4. Web dissemination -** the internet facilitates faster and wider dissemination of census data at relatively low cost, Online platforms-website of NSO, social media, blogs, The NSO web page and electronic data products should maintain the same look and feel as other dissemination materials. All census products that are printed should also be available on the NSO website to ensure standardized outputs.

**5. Online data access -** either static or interactive platforms like Census-Info visualization.

**6. Other dissemination approaches -** public dissemination/launch events –invite NSO leadership (including local level), government leaders (including local governments), community leaders, other key stakeholders; Publications, Excel Tables, Other electronic products -USB, DVD which include publications, Dissemination workshops/ training at national, and sub-national levels, Workshops for thematic areas (e.g., Disability, Labor Force, Gender, etc.)

Other Population dissemination platforms include: 

**-	IPUMS-** which provides census and survey data from around the world integrated across time and space. Its integration and documentation make it easy to study change, conduct comparative research, merge information across data types, and analyze individuals within family and community contexts. The data and services are available free of charge. The application was developed by the University of Minnesota.

**-	REDATAM** (Retrieval of DATa for small Areas by Microcomputer) -for files of micro-data and user-defined outputs.  It is a Statistical software for microdata processing of population and household censuses, surveys, and vital statistics. It was developed by the CELADE Population and Development Division of ECLAC United Nations. It is distributed free of charge. It has elements that make it a powerful tool for instance it allows the processing, analysis, and dissemination of data. 

**-	National Portals-** Various portals are also developed ant National Level for dissemination of census products. For instance, Esri has been engaged with UNFPA on the Population Data Platform (PDP), Covid Hub and overall use of GIS to expand and support UNFPA mission. Additionally, Esri has also been engaged in working directly with countries aiding in work of integration of statistical and geospatial information and modernization with GIS. 

**-	Data for Action: Population Data Portal -**  it includes a geospatial dimension with highest quality GIS attributes. It combines population data with development indicators to map and Leave No One Behind (LNOB). It also combines population data with service locations to evaluate coverage of service delivery. 

It is necessary for the census implementing agencies to: 
-	Solicit feedback from users through sharing questionnaires, use of documented strengths and weaknesses of the dissemination products and modalities to improve the dissemination plan.
-	Ensure that the messages based on the census results are newsworthy to the audience. They should state the who, what, where, when, why and how of the data presented using graphs, charts, quotes from experts, etc. 
-	Embrace development of posters that are eye-catching, using visual means of communication such as infographics to display key facts; brochures and flyers are useful for promoting upcoming dissemination events; Instructional materials e.g., kits for use in schools to encourage interest in census data; offering and promoting online access to products and services ‘on demand’.
-	Build capacity for use of census products. Potential users are not always aware of the benefits of the use of the census for informed, evidence-based decision-making. Users may be willing to use the information but require additional training to more fully understand the data. Identify users’ training needs early and ensure adequate funds are available. Request users or donors to provide funding for specific courses, where necessary. Fully integrate training into the census process so that users are involved and interested in the census throughout. Identify and utilize partnerships on different topics e.g., gender, Provide learning-at-a-distance opportunities (for example, e-learning).
-	Provide data user support through regular User-Producer meetings, and user surveys, post-census press releases and meetings with the media.
-	Embrace data visualization as it helps to give a fast overview or summary of a dataset and creates impact and understanding of the main messages. NSOs should strive to communicate memorable or important stories in a dataset(s) to reveal insights that would otherwise be hidden.
-	Strategize and apply innovative modern technology to improve the quantity, frequency, disaggregation, and availability of relevant statistics. This responds to the global SDG framework that calls for a “data revolution”, which fully integrates statistics into decision-making processes and promotes open access to and use of data.
-	Embrace measurement of success to help them check whether they produced the right thing, whether they have reached everyone they thought they would, to justify continuing developing new products, and identifying improvements for the next product (if regular) or requirements for new products.

Some of the challenges faced in dissemination of census products include:
-	Technical obstacles to disseminate census products e.g., websites are not optimally functional, no/outdated microdata dissemination platforms, funding constraints, staff shortages, skills constraints (IT, data and metadata management, data anonymization skills, training in data platform administration); technical skills: microdata archiving skills, knowledge of data anonymization techniques.
-	Presenting the right data with the right context to meet user’s needs; accuracy of the data - ensuring the most recent and most correct data are used and displayed; use of ICT and data accessibility; challenges in the use; how best to take advantage of the spatial dimension of census data.

Topics for dissemination depend on census content. Census topics should meet the requirements of users, considering cost-effectiveness, human resources, time availability and respondent burden. After census enumeration, priority should be given to development and dissemination of the census products. Implementing agencies should ensure dissemination of the right data, to the right people, at the right time, and in the right format taking into consideration that census data is a public good. There is need to undertake measurement of success after dissemination of census products. 
-	NSOs and other agencies are encouraged to measure the impact and use of their census data through use of google analytics to monitor visits to the website, and heatmaps (via Hotjar) to see how much people are reading on a page, monitor social media and news coverage of the disseminated statistics, sends out surveys with newsletters added to the websites etc. 

-	NSOs need to return to the people they reached out to before, and find out what people are telling them about the latest releases, what questions are they now asking, make a record of this and see how it changes over time. 

-	NSOs should conduct a stakeholder/user satisfaction survey such measurements help to check whether you produced the right product, reached everyone you thought you would, justify continued development of new products, and working out the next steps. 

### 8.3.1	Selected Country Experiences
Countries that conducted their censuses during the 2020 Round, used various approaches to communicate and disseminate the census products to the various stakeholders. Communication and dissemination plans were developed to guide the implementation of census processes.  

**Malawi**
>Malawi developed a monitoring and evaluation and crisis recovery plans for 2018 Census. Dissemination plan was proposed and developed by the NSO Publicity team that set-out specific objectives  and expected outputs; Brainstormed on theoretical framework and strategies; Compiled/documented the proposed approaches and activities; Planned the resources (Communication channels, budget, human resources, etc.); Developed timelines for realistic completion of the tasks/activities; Devised a crisis recovery plan - performed a risk analysis and identified possible “plan Bs”; and Monitoring and evaluation plan.
>
>The Dissemination plan was placed within the broader communication strategy of the 2018 Malawi Census; Regular consultation/bouncing with the PHC Communication strategy was carried out; Audience Analysis/Segmentation was done to Identify key audiences; Message identification, products design and medium/channel for reaching out to propose dissemination products, research and brainstorm on dissemination strategies/approaches, Document/develop dissemination approaches. Among the approaches used was mass communication – 
>- One of the successful approaches for reaching out to masses; Adopted to publicize census products and results through: Radio and TV programs; Press releases, Newspaper inserts, Street banners, Roll-up banners; NSO website and Data Dissemination Platform; Distribution - Libraries, Universities, District Councils/City Assemblies; Distributed Census results through memory cards – easy sharing. 
>-The second approach was: Interpersonal communication – planned working sessions, data literacy engagements with various groups including Members of Parliament, NGOs, CSOs, NSS/Line Ministries etc., social media- for updates and reminders: FB, Twitter, WhatsApp; 
>-The third approach included: Partnerships which included involvement of other organizations/institutions; Building third party and celebrity endorsements who carried along the messages from census; NSO website link on UNFPA-Malawi webpage; Advocacy/promotion activities which included making presentation during meetings, Panel discussions on census results during events (e.g. Launch of Data Dissemination Platform)
Malawi was faced with a challenge of including unplanned costs to cover DSA and high professional fees to engage communication experts.

**Ghana** 
>The Ghana 2021 Population and Housing Census (PHC) dissemination phase aimed at sustained engagement with data users and proposed presentation of census statistics in interactive and user-friendly ways to promote uptake of the data over the next decade; The 2021 PHC dissemination activities  aimed to: Communicate the results of the 2021 PHC, Highlight the resourcefulness of the data; Build public trust in the accuracy and quality of the data collected; Conduct consultations with data users to assess their needs; Present statistics in interactive and user-friendly ways to promote uptake of the data; Conduct sustained intercensal activities for continuity and maintain public awareness of the importance of the census; Share lessons learned from the 2021 PHC with the global community.
>
>The Modes of Stakeholders Engagement included:  Contextual interviews with key stakeholders; Publication of release calendar; Briefing of high-level government officials and census committees; Publication and dissemination of print and online reports; Publication of summary sheets and policy briefs; Interactive census results dashboard; Use of WhatsApp platforms (priority on platforms with high-level officials such as Ministers, CEOs,) for dissemination of graphics and short videos; Email updates to mailing list; Infographics, videographic and data visualizations; Interactive maps; Dissemination seminars/webinars with data users; Capacity building of data users to make data-driven decisions; Statistical awareness and educational programmes using traditional and new media; Blogs and podcasts; Statistical literacy course for journalists; Development of data product souvenirs (posters, calendars, notepads, novelty items, etc.); Statistical outreach activities and public policy advocacy; Publication and dissemination of annual population fact sheet; Development of a statistics for schools programme to encourage the use of census data ; Institution of an annual census awareness day to highlight census statistics; Documentation of the ways that census data is used for decision-making to be incorporated into the publicity, education, and advocacy campaign for the next census; Using Dissemination to Sustain Census Interest: Collaborating with Statistics Denmark to establish online databank; Launch of small business hub on census website; Post-release stakeholder data user seminars/webinars (MDAs, MMDCEs, private sector, media, CSOs, religious institutions, educational institutions, etc.
>Release of thematic reports; Release of analytical reports; post-release media engagement; Census awareness day (annual); Launch of statistics in schools programme; Publication of annual statistical bulletin; Launch of share your census story campaign (in collaboration with Statistics Denmark. Dissemination – “Targeted Users”: Policy makers; Public administration; Academia/Researchers; Businesses; Development partners; Librarians; CSOs; Students; General public.

**Kenya** 
>In Kenya, dissemination involved packaging, distributing, and making available census results in the most effective manner, as well as encouraging wide usage of the data. Data dissemination processes were guided by the dissemination policy which addressed the principles, conditions, technical aspects, and the way KNBS disseminates statistics to users for research and other purposes. 
>
>The Dissemination process utilized included: Public launch of the census results; Publishing basic reports and monographs from the census data; Organizing media forums to share the results; Holding National and County dissemination workshops; Posting results on KNBS website and data portal; production of digital storage media- DVDs, CDs and USB drives; Participating in public platforms for exhibitions e.g. Agricultural Society of Kenya shows; Library – The KNBS library stores publications as reference materials for researchers and the general public; Use of social media—twitter, you-tube,  face book handle to share key highlights; Engagement of the media through media workshop briefs/breakfast meeting briefs; TV and Radio to share the key highlights. 
>
>KNBS tried to involve all stakeholders in census data dissemination planning, especially engagement with the Office of the President to give releases legitimacy and wider coverage. It is important to encourage structures that allow the engagement of key stakeholders from the start of the Census process. KNBS was obliged to release census data or grant access to the data when it is satisfied that all reasonable steps have been considered to safeguard confidentiality of the respondents taking into considerations the country’s legal framework on freedom of information, data protection, and ethical considerations; KNBS shares data/information to individuals or institutions after official release. Kenya was faced with inadequate resources to undertake disseminations to the lower sub national levels.

**Egypt**
>The 2017 census results were published via a platform on the CAPMAS website. The platform disseminates the data from their Census. CAPMAS set up a Geoportal for GIS data from the Census. It used Google Analytics to monitor who are using their Census products. CAPMAS issues an annual schedule of publications, bulletins, indicators, statistical data, they are released and disseminated using various tools that include hard copy publications; soft copy on CD, press statements, Press releases, workshops & Conferences; Fax and Flyers. 
>
>CAPMAS was eager to provide users with the updated data upon their completion, so priority was given to the electronic publication of the preliminary results of the census until the results were published on the official website of CAPMAS. Website Analysis was done using Google Analytics specifically the usage of Google Analytics on the Website Analysis such as Wherefrom (Users’ login, total of users, their category such as: country, language, and detailed data page on views).

**Zimbabwe**
>Zimbabwe produced 8 preliminary reports on a modular basis to provide quick feedback to the 2022 PHC users. Data on census preliminary reports was supposed to be used during 2023 National budget preparation and delimitation of constituency boundaries. Hybrid dissemination workshops were held both physically and virtually using Zoom and Team platforms. Subject matter discussions were also held. The census results were also presented to two Cabinet meetings. The reports were also uploaded on the website www.zimstat.co.zw and Census page on the ODP was created. Social Media was used like: Live streaming of presentation of results on Facebook (Zimstat), Twitter posts and updates (@zimstat), WhatsApp; Electronic and Print media: Invited journalists to attend dissemination workshops, Interviews in local languages Shona and Ndebele held; various Infographics.  Some of the products that were generated included: Census National Report; 10 Census Provincial Profile Reports; Vital Statistics Report from 2022 PHC data; 16 Census Thematic Reports building on 2012 experience; Census Atlas; and Thematic maps. 
>
>The following dissemination methods will be used for the outstanding products: posters, leaflets, wall charts, population datasheets, flyers and brochures will be produced and distributed in all the provinces and districts; Round table discussions and seminars for thematic reports; Media briefs, media releases and fact sheets for all the products. To allow for greater access, the 2022 Population and Housing Census dataset will be added onto the REDATAM-based census database systems which are currently uploaded onto the ZIMSTAT website (www.zimstat.co.zw). This will allow users to generate user-defined tables, graphs and maps using the 2022 Population and Housing Census data. Statistical awareness and educational programs on the ways to access, interpret and use census information will be done for effective outreach. Partnerships with the media to improve the wider dissemination and understanding of statistical information from census.

**Mozambique** 
>Mozambique engaged various stakeholders (political parties, ministry's, medias, NGOs, Donors, etc) from questionnaire development stage to dissemination stage. A dissemination plan was elaborated and implemented in accordance with stakeholders’ segmentation in which they grouped the users into various groups, identified the purpose for which they use the statistics produced, and the format that would be most useful to a given group. 
>
>The groups included: Universities (students/professors) and researchers; Development Cooperation Agencies, donors, international NGOs, and the United Nations; children and teenagers; Entrepreneurs, Banks, and Private Sector; Government; media; Politicians; Statistics Producers (INE, Bank of Mozambique, SEN members); People with special needs / people with disabilities; General public (using an inclusive methodology); Civil society, NGOs and religious institutions. INE mapped suitable formats for each user group and designed a product for each segment, including school children (e.g. comics for the Youth). 
>
>In the last census (2007) the thematic studies were written by NSO staff in collaboration with local universities. Differently, with 2017 census the approach was to use consultants. This imposed challenge on data use by consultants that require deep involvement of INE staff;  When users are involved, making data available, explaining how to use and interpret the data, they respond positively; (example, NSO stabilized a partnership with media association, reining the media and stabilizing flexible communication channels such as WhatsApp; NSO created journalistic award; In response: all media refer to the NSO when talking about statistics; they constantly request for data and clarifications in the WhatsApp group; weekly they publish something about statistics; The average visits increased from 171,207  (2017 and 2018) to  288,721 (2020 and 2021)

**Eswatini** 
>The first Census in Swaziland was conducted in 1956 and since then, following the United Nations recommendations, the Government has kept up to the 10 years schedule. The last census to be conducted was in 2017 census. The census preliminary report was published within four months (September 2017) after enumeration, the thematic reports were done after 30 months (December 2019) after enumeration and the population projections was done in August 2020 (more than 3 years). These reports were printed and availed in soft copy on USB flash disks, and on the Central Statistics Office and Government website. Each report was disseminated as soon as they were published, through stakeholder workshops and electronically for individual user requests. 

### 8.3.2	Lessons Learnt

**-	Financial constraint:** included among others – 1) financial resources being inadequate and unpredictable, 2) withdrawal and reprogramming of approved resources leading to scaling down and making budget adjustments, 3) difficultly to plan based on pledges and unstable resources disbursement plan. Some countries still lacked funding for more dissemination workshops such as university students who will utilize the census data for in-depth analysis as well as businesspeople for investing area etc. 

**-	Staffing issues:** Understaffing and high vacancy rates at the NSO leads to overlap of personnel duties. Limited technical expertise to develop offline dissemination products, effectively anonymize microdata data. 

**-	Effect of Covid19:** the preventive measures derailed and affected implementation of some planned activities for countries were already undertaking the census such as Malawi. 

**-	Online dissemination:** Countries were challenged with the high cost and unstable internet connections due to poor network. The user of unlicensed applications to avoid costs caused interruptions such as zoom meetings were often hacked into. It is noted that the speed, volume and reach of today’s digital information flows are also creating conditions for misinformation, fake news, and false ‘evidence’ to thrive.

**-	Non acceptance of census results:** some stakeholders may refuse to accept the released results for various reasons as was the case for the 2019 KPHC data. 

**-	Failure to use simple language to explain concepts:** In Zimbabwe, users had problems in understanding concepts and definitions in the functioning, housing characteristics and labour force modules.  Journalists had problems in interpreting and reporting on the maternal mortality ratio as well as Life Expectancy at birth. This was also coupled with failure to interpret census results in local languages.
-	Mozambique appreciated that CAPI enabled the office to receive timely data thus making the production of census products more efficient than in previous censuses; for the office to use CAPI to its fullest advantage, the application had to run as smooth as possible; But because the data collection process was not 100% perfect, this resulted in the data processing unit taking longer to clean the data for use in analysis. This resulted in the launch of the thematic reports to be delayed by a couple of years. 
-	Disseminating through stakeholder workshops was the most effective way however, they are expensive as these workshops take place in hotels, lodges, and community halls where refreshments must be provided. Government does provide a budget which then needs to be supplemented by other development partners; availability of technical assistance to support the preparation of census products is key. This is necessary for strengthening the capacity of the NSO and local skills in general.
-	Other challenges existed such as unstable government internet, insufficient funding for dissemination workshops, insufficient analytical skills for specialized themes such mortality, fertility, and migration. 

### 8.3.3	Recommendations
Based on the challenges and lessons documented, the following recommendations are proposed:
-	NSOs need to plan for dissemination of results ahead of time as it informs resource allocation for the census. Having a successful dissemination schedule/plan necessitates all reports and publications to be produced and released within the timelines; A dissemination plan is priceless as it allows easy implementation of dissemination activities.
-	Solicit for the government political will and stakeholder involvement in all census phases to avoid rejection of results. For instance, engage the Office of the President during release of the data to build goodwill from the public as well as give adequate publicity for the dissemination.
-	Additionally, census implementing agencies should leverage on technology developments and social media platforms for the census products to reach a wider audience while taking care not to neglect those not able to access the technology.  
-	There is need to further decentralize the dissemination of census results from regional down to constituency levels.
-	In Eswatini, a national user consultation and telephonic surveys was scheduled. Participants concluded that user involvement is important and productive in all phases of census and development of thematic studies is better to prioritize engaging technical personnel from NSOs, universities and relevant Ministries.
