---
id: 6.3. Remuneration
sidebar_position: 3
---


### 6.3.1 Introduction
It is worth noting that the size of the remuneration package affects the number and quality of staff who will apply for the census jobs. This in turn affects the overall quality of the data collected. Therefore, the renumeration should be attractive but not overstretch the budget. The bulk of the census budget goes to payment of census personnel due to the large numbers involved. 

**Key consideration in handling renumeration**

-	While setting up the remuneration package, it is important for the census agency to apply the appropriate market rates, especially drawing from the country specific experiences in undertaking similar activities. 
-	The set remuneration package and modalities for payments should be communicated to the census staff early enough, preferably at the time of the job advertisement.
-	The staff should have an electronic money transaction account to ensure payments are made to the final beneficiaries. 

### 6.3.2 Selected country experiences
#### Namibia
>All payments for the census pilot were handled by the National Statistics Agency’s finance department with the advice from HR and field operations division. All temporally staff who were recruited under the census pilot were paid a daily wage rate, daily field allowance, daily training allowance, transport allowance for all field staff working in urban EAs as well as airtime allowance. All team supervisors who were collecting vehicles away from their duty stations were paid transport allowance.
>
>Payments of field allowances were made in two instalments - 50% was paid at the start of the field work and the remaining 50% was paid in the middle of the field work.  Airtime was paid with the monthly salary pro-rated or in full, depending on the employment contract start date. All legal deductions were made as prescribed by the law.  

#### Kenya
>The census personnel were paid as per the approved 2019 KPHC rates. The rates were applied throughout the census period. The payments were made directly to personal bank accounts or mobile phone numbers. Statutory deductions were applicable. No cash payments were made except for the NGAOs during mapping and sensitization exercises. 

### 6.3.3 Lessons learnt
There were delays with payment of the field allowance due to a limited payroll system to cater for many field staff. 
Use of an electronic payment platform makes it easier to manage the bulky payments expected during the census process. 

### 6.3.4 Recommendations
Mechanisms to undertake verification of the details of the various census personnel needs to be in place to ensure that payments are not made to wrong persons and are done in a timely manner.
