# Chapter 07: Logisitics, Financial Management and Procurement - Recommendations
[back to Handbook Chapter 7](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/category/chapter-07-logistics-financial-management-and-procurement)

1. To effectively manage census logistics, there should be strong partnerships and collaboration both within and out of the country. For instance, in Kenya, other government departments with good infrastructure assisted in movement of materials such as the disciplined forces (Army and police) for provision of transport and security. This collaboration can also continue for future censuses.
2.	The constitution of a census logistics team is a good practice but should be done early in the census planning cycle, at least one year to census enumeration and the team should be part of the pilot census. The operations at the subnational level should be given attention in terms of staffing and training on logistical operations.
3.	It is ideal to have a separate warehouse that should be ready at least 3 months before census enumeration. The material handling should be computerized and integrated into Enterprise Resource Planning systems. However, to minimize costs and in the event of a lack of proper planning, the logistics team should be in position to improvise within the available resources. For instance, Kenya did not have proper storage space at the national level, and it utilized the unfinished office space that was to be used by the library at KNBS HQ as storage space and logistics operation center. Other offices within KNBS HQ were also used as storage facilities.  
4.	The required fleet should be planned for and acquired in good time. Petrol stations should be identified and fueling mechanisms established to take care of re-fueling in all areas of the country.
5.	In addition to having the normal sub national level (county) bank accounts, it is important to open a bank account dedicated only to facilitating census activities at that level. In addition, include the sub national level accountants in the process of managing census funds at that level, they should undergo a thorough training on financial management and accounting of funds. They should be involved at an early stage of the census planning such as budgeting. This enables more efficient management and accountability of census funds.
6.	There should be timely constitution of the procurement and disposal committee and appointment of its sub-committees such as the Inspection and Acceptance/Rejection Committee (evaluation committee) that ensures that the goods and services are availed promptly. This will enable early planning and coordination of procurement processes. Where necessary external stakeholders should be involved in all stages of procurement for electronic devices.
7. There should be strong synergy among the census committees, the user directorates with the procurement division. This should be buttressed with effective communication between the procurement division and the user directorate on item specifications. There should be frequent and regularly scheduled procurement committee meetings to provide status updates that in turn enhance monitoring of progress made in requested materials and avoid unnecessary delays in procurement. Additionally, there should be early identification of risks and forwarding them to risk management committee for timely mitigation to reduce their probability and likely impact.
