---
sidebar_position: 8
---

# Chapter 09:Technology, Innovations and Data Management
[back to Handbook Chapter 9](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/category/chapter-09-ict)

1.	Countries should engage the local mobile phone companies to provide internet services at an agreed fairer fee. This plays a vital role in transfer of data directly from the field to the offices to avoid multiple layers of data transfer and possible data loss. This also allows for real-time data flow monitoring and quality assurance.
2.	Procurement of census servers should be done well on time (at least 6 months before census enumeration). This should give the data management team enough time to interact and familiarize them with the servers by having adequate simulations and test runs.
3.	Countries are encouraged as much as possible to use tablets of the same specifications to allow for uniform trouble shooting and consistency in data transmission, security etc. Consideration of which devices to be procured for use in the Main Census should be given to those that have been put to test during the pilot exercise to avoid the experience of Botswana.
4.	All software and systems intended to be used during census enumeration should be thoroughly tested during the pilot census before they are deployed for use on a large scale to avoid interference in training and census enumeration. The CAPI application should be developed by a large team to mitigate unforeseeable eventuality. 
5.	Countries are encouraged to use a high-speed bandwidth that is not internet dependent considering that multiple tablets are connected to the network simultaneously during provisioning of tablets to minimize costs as was the case in Kenya.
6.	The mobile device management software should be procured well on time to avoid last-minute device enrollment because without device enrolment, it is not possible to manage or install Apps in the devices and this delays the entire process.
7.	Unique identification for the tablets should be based on geocodes. This is key because batching of tablets should be done down to the sublocation level for easy tracking and allocation as was the case in Kenya and Botswana. 
8.	The use of a daily monitoring dashboard for census implementation progress is very important and makes possible important communications and changes to avoid and mitigate errors in data as evidenced from Kenya and Sierra Leone.
9.	It is important to provide the monitoring dashboard at the time of training of field staff so that its essence is made known at that stage. As a result, the data collecting exercise will function better. When field staff are aware that their performance is continually evaluated in relation to targets. Every member of the field crew must be familiar with how the system works and how coverage is monitored as was the case in Sierra Leone. 
10.	A dedicated team constituting programmers (data managers), headquarter ICT support, Demographers and other subject-matter specialists should be stationed to undertake the following duties; Monitor quality of data as it streams in, run programs to detect and resolve any inconsistencies in the data, coordinate technical assistance for all field teams, prepare technical briefs for the census coordination office, backup data and provide feedback to the field teams in time as was the case in Kenya.
11.	As was the case in Kenya, setting up a support center should be at the headquarters of the census implementing agency. The following should be put into considerations: the number of personnel operating in the support center and their training on the questionnaire content.  Possession of call center and ICT skills should be a pre-requisite for personnel to be recruited. Provision of efficient support center equipment such as laptops, phones, desks, and seats.  
12.	A census call center should have a clear work cycle with an ICT incident Management System whereby problems and inquiries are received from the enumerator or supervisor during enumeration and the call Centre Agent sends the case to field or headquarters technical support team and an update should be provided as to whether the case has been resolved.
13. For consistency in data quality checks, it is recommended that data transmission is layered i.e from an interviewer to an immediate supervisor via cost effective means like Bluetooth then the supervisors send to the main server via internet. This reduces on stress at the headquarters level who monitor through the dashboard.
14. Areas without mobile phone network, it is wise to explore other means of connectivity like the use of Satellite Dishes to ensure continued data transmission.
15.	Network security at all levels should be ensured through use of firewalls, updated antivirus and continuous monitoring of the processes. 
16.	To ensure the entire infrastructure security at all levels, the census implementing agency can engage a consultant to work with the ICT team in areas such as data center security, transmission security, network security and penetration testing among others. This technical advice can in addition provide for network intrusion checks.
17.	The practice of not printing Enumeration area Maps but rather have soft copies installed on the tablets is a recommended good practice that saves costs and unnecessary anxiety in areas that have boundary conflicts that can get violent and even destroy the data. For instance, Sierra Leone used Census Pad with online resources like Open Street to generate soft copy maps of enumeration areas installed on the tablets. 



