---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Introduction
## 6.1 Recruitment
### 6.1.1 Introduction 
Census undertaking is a massive exercise that requires a huge number of personnel that cannot be raised from the NSOs employees alone. This calls for recruitment of many persons   for a short period engagement in various categories and levels. 
Considerations for recruitment in a digital census
-	Prior to embarking on recruitment, the number of the required census personnel needs to be established by cadre and geographic region. 
-	To successfully recruit suitable staff, several mechanisms need to be put in place. This requires development of guidelines for the recruitment and deployment of highly qualified census personnel. The guidelines should detail advertisement, selection/vetting, hiring, performance evaluation and payments procedures. 
-	During job advertisements, a clear communication and publicity programme should be in place to attract highly qualified personnel and reach those from hard-to-reach areas especially areas without good network coverage. -
-	During recruitment, place of residence of the enumerators and language spoken is a priority. Preferably, enumerators should be residents from the EA to make logistical, administrative, and good reception easier during enumeration. 
-	It is also worth noting that some cadre like supervisors may be filled by people from special groups like schoolteachers through direct appointment. 
-	In a census undertaking, recruitment can be done by the implementing agency, or another government institution or private institution can be engaged to recruit for the implementing agency.
-	During recruitment, the capability of the field personnel to use the devices and technology needs to be evaluated before deployment depending on the roles and responsibilities. 

**Recruitment during the non-digital vs digital era**
Unlike in the paper census, a digital census requires additional cadres to handle the ICT component. This includes a team to undertake data quality checks at either national or Regional Level, a team to provide IT support to the supervisors and enumerators including trouble shooting among others. Additionally, for a digital census it is a prerequisite that supervisors should be IT literate and enumerators should at least have knowledge on use of smartphones.  
During the 2020 PHC Round, several approaches were used to undertake recruitment of various cadres of personnel. Some countries used a manual system of recruitment while others used e-recruitment systems. In an e-recruitment system, adequate testing and piloting of the recruitment approach should be done and several factors may be considered such as: 
-	Capacity of the ICT infrastructure to handle millions of applications, 
-	Nationwide network coverage, 
-	Experience in using and ability to access the e-recruitment system, 
-	How to handle areas that may lack applicants due to network coverage or lack of information about the recruitment among others. 
The main advantages of e-recruitment systems is that it saves time as it was auto-grading, as such, results were shown instantly after finishing the assessment. Setting up an assessment for 1,000 people took almost the same amount of effort as it is to set up an assessment for 10 people. There are reduced costs relating to printing of test papers as well as costs for purchasing printing paper, toner, time taken to print, manpower/resource personnel, binding etc. The assessments are more secure and less exam malpractices  because there were fewer chances of leaks since there were no physical papers that can go missing during the printing and logistics processes.

### 6.1.2 Selected country experiences
This sub section outlines selected country experiences of recruitment processes.
It is noted that Namibia had a full take of the key considerations for an e-census recruitment process while Kenya and Botswana had a good approach to conducting assessment of the applicants. The recruitment in these countries aimed to achieve a ratio of enumerators to content supervisors at four-five and the ratio of enumerators to IT supervisors varied widely from 50 in Kenya to 3,375 in Sierra Leone.

**Namibia**
>Namibia used an e-recruitment system during implementation of pilot and main census enumeration. The NSO recruited enumerators, team supervisors and IT field technicians as per the planned field structure. The recruitment for the census pilot was mainly at constituency level and the most preferred people were those who live in the selected EAs and all the temporary census pilot positions were advertised externally i.e. on the NSA website, the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations and Employment Creation’s website, in the local newspapers, on the Radio and on the noticeboards of the following places:  NSA Regional office, Regional council office, the Clinics, Schools, Police stations, Malls or Shopping centers. Any persons interested in applying for the various positions was encouraged to apply online via the Ministry of Labour, Industrial Relations, and Employment Creation’s website. 
>One of the recruitment criteria was that applicants should have completed grade 12, which was a challenge for areas with low literacy rates. In addition, the following personal /biographical information of each applicant was considered as criteria for selection, namely educational qualifications, driver’s license, language proficiency, basic IT literacy and previous survey experience. Candidates were deployed within the same constituency of residence, because such persons are already familiar with the people, places, and customs in their respective communities.

**Kenya**
>Kenya used a manual recruitment process, and a recruitment guideline was prepared to guide through the entire process. Prior to census enumeration, a job advertisement for enumerators, content supervisors and ICT Supervisors was published in the MyGov newspaper supplement of 11th June 2019 contained in all daily newspapers. The recruitment aimed to achieve a ratio of enumerators to content supervisors at five and for ICT supervisors at 50. 
>The recruitment processes were carried out in the counties by the County Census Committees. The County Statistical Officers received applications for ICT Supervisors while Content Supervisors and Enumerators submitted their applications to the Chief’s Office and Assistant Chief’s office, respectively. After receiving the applications, the County Census recruitment committee used the qualifications as they were in the advert to shortlist. The number to be shortlisted was guided by the number of applicants and the positions to be filled. The committee ranked those who qualified based on the strength of their qualifications and the roles to be undertaken and the one third gender rule as required by law. At the point of application, details of the applicants were summarized using a standard form that was provided. The summary details included: Name of the applicant, Identification Number, Mobile Phone Number, Age, Sex, Disability Status, Ethnicity, Sub-County of Residence, Kenya Certificate of Secondary Grade, and Highest level of Education completed. The filled forms were submitted to the County Census Committees. 
>To ensure uniformity in the recruitment, standard interview tests were developed and shared electronically with the County Census Committees in a password-protected document for integrity. The County Census Committee submitted the list of applicants shortlisted and selected candidates to the Director General for approval. The successful candidates were notified through public notice boards, phone calls and text messages.

**Botswana**
>Botswana used e-recruitment for the 2022 PHC for enumerators and supervisor’s testing and selection. The recruitment aimed to achieve a ratio of enumerators to content supervisors at four. During the Pilot census, the assessment was done using google forms which required internet access for the whole period of writing up to submitting the test and instant receipt of test scores. 
>For the main census, a team of system developers reviewed the assessment tool and developed it in CSPro software. The assessment was accessed through a CAPI system that was able to work offline but needed internet connection for synchronizing/submitting the assessment that was also backed up on tablets. The assessment was password protected and only made available when allowed and ready to take the test. All applicants taking the assessment were registered in the system by using their national identity card numbers (Omang). For those who were not Omang, the development team had to register them to access the test.

**Sierra Leone**
>The recruitment procedures adopted for 2021 MTPHC followed a similar pattern of the past censuses in Sierra Leone. The recruitment aimed to achieve a ratio of enumerators to content supervisors at five and for ICT supervisors at 3,375.  Job advertisements were put out over the media for the various categories of field staff needed for the cartography mapping, pilot census and the main census enumeration. Ability to handle an electronic instrument (phone, iPad, laptop, desktop etc.) was an advantage in the recruitment process for the Mid Term Census cartography and census. Shortlisted candidates were interviewed, the successful candidates went through training and examinations to guide the selection of field staff. Extra persons were recruited to serve as a reserve in case of illness, bad performance or abandonment of positions. Contracts and picture IDs were provided to each successful participant at the end of training to aid field staff identification.  
>
### 6.1.3 Lessons learnt.
The high recruitment criteria (grade 12) set in Namibia resulted in many new trainees with limited experience in data collection (census/surveys). This has implications for training given the adage that experience is the best teacher. There is likely to be staff attrition because this category is job seeking.

In Botswana’s pilot census, a challenge arose with google forms during assessment. If the internet connection is poor/cut in some instances the test would reload leading to loss of the recorded answers, forcing one to start the assessment all over again. This posed a serious challenge for areas with poor internet connection. 

In addition, with google forms after completing the assessment the enumerators and supervisors were able to view the answered assessment which displayed both the correct and wrong answered questions which raised a lot of concerns about the marking key.

The manual recruitment process for the census enumeration requires a lot of time and therefore it needs to be planned to start as early as possible and allocated adequate resources to ensure that the recruitment process is completed in time.

### 6.1.4 Recommendations
-	A recruitment software/portal should be deployed to ease the process of receiving applications, shortlisting, and selection of personnel.
-	Provision of adequate workforce at the sub region (statistics offices if they exist) during the census period should be made.
-	The recruitment process should ensure strict adherence to the census timelines.
