## 6.2 Training 
### 6.2.1 Introduction
Census undertaking mostly engages short-term temporary staff with limited experience or training in statistical operations and therefore proper mechanisms need to be put in place to ensure that sufficient training is undertaken for the personnel to understand: their duties; how their efforts fit into overall census goals; and obligations of data collectors such as confidentiality. 
**Considerations for training in a digital census**
-	Prior to the commencement of trainings, the census implementing agency has the responsibility for developing a detailed training strategy outlining the training programme and schedule of the trainings. 
-	For consistency in the training across the entire country, the training materials should be developed centrally and in time, a standard application of the training materials is key. 
-	Training in census is normally done in a cascaded manner starting with master trainers who are mostly subject area specialists, training of trainers, training of supervisors and lastly training of enumerators. 
-	It is essential for the training approach to be tested on a small scale and should then be used during the pilot census.  
-	During the training, it is good practice for trainers to meet at the end of the day to review progress and handle unresolved issues to improve the quality of training.
**Training during the non-digital vs digital era**
In the digital census, additional efforts are needed to train the census personnel on the CAPI application, including basic IT skills especially on the safety of the devices and how to navigate the various tablet applications. It is therefore very important for the duration of the training to be planned well and adequately. 

### 6.2.2 Selected country experiences
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant effect on census operations especially training and field work for countries that conducted the census in the same period. National statistical offices and census agencies collaborated with the relevant health authorities to enhance safety protocols to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. The changes introduced included the fumigation of training facilities, the screening of participants, adherence to the recommended seating arrangement of two metres spacing between participants at training sessions, and body hygiene measures (handwashing and sanitizing). Because of the new activities to ensure compliance with COVID-19 guidelines, the training took longer and required more trainers, so the cost increased.
Some countries trained their field staff purely online. Others had a hybrid training system in which enumerators would attend online, have pre-recorded training sessions at a common training centre with the involvement of data quality monitors, this was found to be better than a purely online system.

**Namibia**
___
Due to COVID-19 regulations issued by the government when the census pilot was conducted, the training of enumerators was done in small groups with numbers of less than 30 per class. There were three levels of trainings conducted during the census pilot namely, 
-	Level 1: The master training was attended by around 20 qualified subject matter staff from the field operations, sampling, demographers, data processing and IT for a duration of 10 days in Windhoek. This training was facilitated by Managers and Executives from the subject matter area which included the census manager.
-	 Level 2: The Training of Trainers (ToT) was attended by around 50 qualified subject matter Statisticians, Assistant Statisticians, regional Statisticians including the IT field technical staff for a duration of 10 days in Windhoek. This training was facilitated by all the staff that attended the master training. 
-	Level 3: The main training for all field staff, this level of training was conducted at regional level. The highest number of trainees per classroom was 26 and the lowest was 12 and it proved to be well manageable. A total of 191 trainees were trained across the 14 regions and this level of training was facilitated all the staff that attended the ToT for a duration of 10 days. 
Level 1 and 2 trainings were conducted back-to-back with no break in between, after level 2 was done a one-week break was taken for preparations and deployment for the main training. Daily training review sessions were conducted to discuss any unresolved issues during training with the aim of improving the quality of training.
___ 

**Kenya**
>The training for the census enumeration personnel was implemented in a cascaded manner. The first training level was the Training of Trainers involving 500 participants in a central place. Thereafter, the Trainers trained the ICT supervisors at regional level. The ICT Supervisors then trained the Content Supervisors for 7 days. The trained census personnel were then deployed in their respective enumeration areas.
>
>Training of enumerators was conducted on a non-residential basis in schools and churches for most of the regions except arid and semi-arid areas in which they were residential. In the non-residential training venues, payments were made to cater for meals and stationery. Training of trainers and supervisors (ICT and Content supervisors) were non-residential. Training of Trainers was held from 15th to 22nd July, 2019, training of ICT supervisors was done from 25th to 1st August, 2019 while training of content supervisors and enumerators were conducted from 4th to 11th August and 14th to 20th August, 2019 respectively. 

### 6.2.3 Lessons learnt.
-	Some countries trained their field staff online. This posed challenges like divided attention, those attending trainings from home would sometimes do other tasks at the same time or would not give their full attention to the training. Sometimes, they would even delegate attendance to others. This at the end of the day compromises the quality of data.
-	In Namibia, the high recruitment criteria (grade 12) resulted in many new trainees with limited experience in data collection (census/surveys). Thus, required more time for field practice during training.
-	Internet connection was a challenge during training for some of the training centres due to network problems where certain centres were located.
-	It is desirous to utilize free training venues but there exists limited availability of public facilities for training in some parts of countries in Africa, and these should be properly planned and budgeted for. 
-	Just like all the other census phases, delays in the disbursement of payments distort the timelines and lead to rushed last minute decisions that may affect data quality.  

### 6.2.4 Recommendations 
-	To have effective and successful training, there should be timely procurement of training venues. Endeavor to have face-to-face training while ensuring strict adherence to the census timelines.
-	The training schedule should be dynamic, using multiple training methods and materials. It should also match the caliber of people recruited. The training timetable and materials should be piloted and if any adjustments are required then they should be implemented in time.
