## 10.1 Pre-enumeration listing of households

The cartographic mapping undertaken prior to enumeration provides the number of EAs and management areas, estimated number of households and population as well as information about problem areas for planning purposes. Close to the enumeration, a household listing may be undertaken to get a more accurate estimate of the number of households in each EA as a way of quality control to measure coverage. This pre-enumeration household listing is done right at the end of the training of enumerators and before the start of enumeration. An ideal EA should be conversed by enumerator within one day during the listing exercise.  The listing exercise should preferably capture the GPS coordinate of the households, name of household head, number of usual members of the given household among other variables. 

The objectives of pre-enumeration household listing exercise include to:
- Aid in evaluating the expected workload during the planned days of enumeration. 
- Aid in monitoring the level of coverage as enumeration progressed.  
- Give a snapshot of the expected population. 
- Gauge the effectiveness of data transmission to the server.

### 10.1.1	Selected country experiences
As part of the pre-enumeration listing of households, it is important to undertake a clear publicity of the exercise to the public. Below are some highlights of selected countries experiences regarding implementation of the pre-enumeration household listing.

**Kenya**
>Pre-enumeration listing of households involved visiting, identifying, and listing all the households within the EA. It was undertaken for two days on 22nd and 23rd August 2019 immediately after concluding EA identification. In the households, enumerators informed the respondents that the listing would be followed by actual census enumeration, starting on the night of the 24th /25th August 2019. Households that were missed out during pre-enumeration household listing were covered, concurrently with the actual enumeration. The actual implementation involved using an uploaded pre-enumeration household listing questionnaire in the CAPI, the enumerator captured the following variables: GPS Coordinates of the main structure of the respective household; Structure number; Household number; Name of household head; Total number of usual members in the household (de jure). 
>
>The inbuilt application automatically generated structure and household numbers that started with an S. The enumerators used these numbers to generate a three-digit number for the structure, then a slash followed by a three-digit number for the household. For example, if the structure number was fifteen, and household number was thirty, the enumerator wrote the generated as S015/030. All the structures in the EAs were numbered in a systematic manner to avoid omissions or duplications. The enumerator either used chalk, felt pen and/or card to number all the structures somewhere conspicuous but where it could not be easily tampered with. 
>
>The enumerators got the opportunity to know and create rapport with the village elders and potential respondents. This also helped them to identify dignitaries, VIPs and any institutions or non-conventional households within the EA. It is during this period that the special area enumerators assigned to cover non-conventional households’ such as travelers, vagrants/outdoor sleepers, hotels, army camps/barracks, GSU camps, prisons, KWS camps, remand homes, police cells, hospitals, children’s homes, convents, and monasteries identified the location of the areas assigned.

### 10.1.2	Lessons Learnt
1.	It was noted that there was inadequate publicity  for the two days’ pre-enumeration listing of households. Although, the teams were accompanied to the households by village elders who introduced them to the households.  This could cause confusion in the community by households thinking that this is the actual enumeration coupled with the earlier mapping exercise that may have visited the same household head. 
2.	Large EAs  took longer time to navigate and may lead to fatigue among the enumerators ahead of the actual census enumeration. The EA demarcation should also consider the time considerations required for pre-enumeration household listing.
3.	Weak GPS signals in forested areas, around tall buildings and ASAL areas affected the accuracy of the readings. Kenya had no mitigation measure to this but in future a system that uses tapped coordinates can be employed to ensure complete and accurate GPS readings.

### 10.1.3	Recommendations
It is recommended that the pre-enumeration listing of households is done soon after the training and completed the day before enumeration starts and should have the community well informed. It should be done electronically for quick results.
