---
sidebar_position: 3
---

## 10.2 EA identification

Most of the censuses in Africa during the 2020 PHC round used geospatial data during enumeration. The main role of maps in the census process is to support enumeration. Maps showing EAs provide a means to ensure full coverage of the census and support supervision of enumeration activities. During the census, maps assist enumerators to easily identify their assigned EAs. EA identification is therefore the process of establishing census enumeration unit boundaries.

In the digital era, high resolution maps of the respective areas of work are uploaded on enumerators and supervisor’s tablets using various software that are compatible with the data collection application. The handheld devices therefore contain EA maps with addresses detailing assignments for geo tracking to ensure complete coverage of an EA as well as satellite imagery for housing unit identification. The objectives of using maps during enumeration is to: Ensure that correct EAs are identified and locate the structures and households; Ensure there is completeness of enumeration coverage; Aid the enumerator to move systematically within the EA; and Assist supervisors to allocate work, monitor progress and supervise the enumerators.

### 10.2.1	Selected country experiences
It was noted that although it is a digital census, the hard copy map print outs may need to be availed to the enumerators depending on the circumstances and findings from the pilot census. Therefore, a budget and for printing maps should be put into consideration especially for urban areas. Below are some highlights of selected country experiences:

**Kenya**
>An enumerator was assigned an EA and was required to be accompanied by a village elder. With the guidance of the assistant chiefs and the village elders, the enumerators used the EA maps to identify their enumeration areas. Both hard and soft copy digital EA maps were produced for census enumeration purposes.  Two soft copy pdf maps, one for the sub-location and the other for the EA were uploaded into the tablets for rural areas only. For urban areas such as Nairobi, Mombasa and Kisumu cities, hard copy maps were used because soft copy maps were too huge for uploading and lacked clarity. Thus, both soft and hard copy maps of an EA were used for the identification of the EAs.

### 10.2.2	Lessons Learnt

1.	Enumerators experienced difficulties with the EA maps such as in identifying EA boundaries in some urban areas while in other areas, EAs along county boundaries overlapped. The enumerators were supported by the local leaders to allay the problem. Failure to identify boundaries and overlapping boundaries stems from the cartographic mapping which should be explicitly avoided for all the areas across the country.
2.	In some instances, the application on the tablets could not read maps in PDF format implying the system was not interactive. In such cases, hard copy maps were required yet the teams also experience delays in delivery of printed maps to the field. Hence forcing enumerators to use the uploaded EA maps with their inherent challenges. This predisposes coverage concerns.

### 10.2.3	Recommendations
Based on the above encounters, the cartographic mapping process should be done well in advance of the enumeration and the pilot census should target the likely boundary problematic areas and test the map reading application thoroughly so that a uniform solution is got upfront.
