---
sidebar_position: 5
---

## 10.4 Data quality assurance

An assessment of the quality of enumeration can be obtained through various techniques such as post-enumeration surveys to gauge the level of under enumeration or over enumeration of people and dwellings; overall response from the target population or level of non-response at the question level; feedback from field staff; measures of the quality of any coding undertaken by field staff among others. 

During enumeration, data quality can be ensured through the various supervision levels designed by the census implementing agency but most important is the need to have independent monitors . These monitors can be drawn from the development partners, donors, Civil Society Organizations, National Statistical Offices (NSOs) in Africa, the academia and other government agencies. The main objective of having independent monitors during enumeration is to enhance the credibility of the census data and specifically to: Document the census process, lessons learnt and good practices for building capacity in future censuses  based on selected enumeration areas; and observe objectively the census against international standards and national legislation and provide regular feedback to the NSO during and after the census activities.

Traditional quality control  is based on correction of errors after the event, whereas the emphasis in a digital census is on process improvement rather than correction. The ability to reduce human error during data collection is higher in a digital census given that a well-designed CAPI application ensures internal validation checks to have all compulsory fields captured, skip patterns observed . As well as using consistency controls to improve the integrity, accuracy, and completeness of data collection. 

**Key considerations for census data quality assurance**
-	The quality assurance and improvement system should be developed as part of the overall census programme and integrated with all other census phase plans, schedules, and procedures. This should be established at the planning stage.
-	Census processes should at least show methodological soundness and adherence to professional and internationally agreed standards  and efficiency, relevance of data, completeness, accuracy of data, comparisons across space , timeliness of information, accessibility, data coherence. 
-	There should be good internal quality assurance mechanisms.  e.g. Supervisor field case management should encompass the methods by which interviewers receive assignments, manage the completeness and quality of their questionnaires. Field supervisors should oversee the completeness and quality of interviewer outputs , upload it for management review . The higher-level field managers track the progress of survey operations.  
-	There should be sound institutional arrangements to ensure good data quality, such as:
-	the degree to which the statistical legislation is enacted in accordance with the fundamental principles of official statistics. 
-	the degree to which the NSO operationalizes its long-term planning of statistical operations. 
-	the degree to which statistical systems are properly funded and staffed.
-	available support and coordination among census stakeholders and the NSO.

### 10.4.1	Selected country experiences
Below are some highlights of selected country practices:

**Kenya**

>A team of independent monitors/observers drawn from the United Nations (UN) Agencies, Civil Societies, National Statistical Offices (NSOs) in Africa, Academic Institutions, as well as National Gender and Equality Commission (NGEC) conducted an independent monitoring/observation of the census enumeration exercise between 21st and 31st August 2019. They monitored, reviewed, and gave feedback to KNBS in real time about the census process. The monitors/observers were neutral witnesses of the enumeration process and did not interfere with the enumeration process in any way.
>
>The monitors/observers were provided with unified observation tools and trained on the same methodology to properly appraise and report on several elements of data collection. They were distributed in all regions and covered the following aspects of the census:
>    -	Storage facilities in county statistics offices, advocacy materials, accessibility of EAs in the sub counties.
>    -	Identification of EA boundaries with focus on clarity of boundaries using EA maps and support from the village elders and assistant chiefs.
>    -	Pre-enumeration Household listing.
>    -	Enumeration materials and equipment, enumerator’s proficiency in data collection skills, and local languages.
>
>After enumeration, the monitors prepared reports which were presented to the KNBS management.
Additionally, as part of quality assurance, supervisor module was included in the CAPI application in which the supervisors were able to select a few households randomly, conduct re-interview and generate a report. Any variations were addressed by the enumerators in discussion with the supervisors. A team of coordinators drawn from the various census committees were also deployed to undertake monitoring and observations of the enumeration process.

### 10.4.2 	Lessons Learnt
1.	Supervisors should be facilitated to ensure they are able to reach their enumerators more than twice a day to administer the re-interview . Supervisor module should be embraced as it flags out the quality issues at the lower level and hence addressed within time.
2.	Independent monitoring by international observers should be embraced as it promotes credibility of the entire census process and provides a learning lesson for countries planning for a census exercise.

### 10.4.3	Recommendations
The consequences of census data being of poor quality may be detrimental to policy decisions; more importantly and ultimately, the credibility of the entire census, the competency of the national statistical system, and the government itself will be put into question and the trust of society may never be fully recovered. It is highly recommended to have independent monitors during enumeration to enhance quality assurance.
