---
id: 2.3. Establishment of implementation committees 
sidebar_position: 4
---

Given the magnitude of a census undertaking it is ideal to have several formal mechanisms to strengthen the coordination such as formation of multisectoral advisory committees to utilize and gain access to levels of expertise and experience. In establishing these committees, the following considerations should be made:
- They should have clear responsibilities and roles of providing advice on strategic issues or technical issues, and will not only be involved in the planning and preparatory phases but also in the operational phases. 
- They should be created early enough to avoid last minute team formation.

### 2.3.1	Selected country experiences
Some of the best practices include that there should be a census secretariat with a designated national census coordinator, committees formed at the national and sub national level, a steering and technical committee (which should have more specific sub committees). Outsourcing technical services should be an integral decision within the implementation committees and made part of the overall plan and budget.
 
**Kenya**
>Committees and offices coordinated the implementation of the census process. The legal notice outlined the membership and functions of the committees and office bearers of the census offices. These committees were operationalized by inaugural meetings organized by the respective chairpersons. The members were inducted on their roles and responsibilities during the inauguration.
- The committees included: National Census Steering Committee, Technical Working Committee, and County Census Committees.
- The offices included the KNBS Board, National Census Executive Officer and National Census Coordinator created based on the 2019 KPHC Legal Notice No. 205 of 13th Nov 2018. 
- The census secretariat and its sub committees were created by the National Census Coordinator via circulars detailing membership and functions with approval of KNBS Board.

**Namibia**
>The project document had a clear census structure highlighting the roles of:
>- the high-level functions such as census management structure, with the Statistician General as the National Census Coordinator supported by a Census Manager. 
>- key administrative and management organs of the census such as the cabinet, Minister of Economics and Planning, National Census Steering Committee (high level). 

>Committees were formed both at National and Regional level to guide and coordinate the census implementation. They included: High level/steering Committee; Inter-census technical committee; Census advocacy and publicity Committee; Regional census Committees; Census Procurement committee; Census recruitment Committee and Census resource Mobilization Committee. 
>
>Sub committees were formed within NSA and Subcommittee leaders were issued with Terms of Reference outlining their specific roles and expected outputs. These included: Census Methodology, IT & Data Processing committee; Census Field Operation and logistics Sub-committee; Census advocacy and publicity Sub Committee; Census Mapping Sub-Committee and Census Quality & methodology Sub-committee.

**Sierra Leone**
>The existing legal basis for Population and Housing Censuses has provision for the appointment of a Census Advisory Committee to provide policy guidelines, mobilize the necessary resources for the Census, and generally act as the link between the Government and the Census Secretariat. 
>
>A Census Secretariat was set up with the NSO’s regional and district offices headed by statisticians serving as the field arm.  Census Technical Committee was established to address all the technical aspects of the census and it drew its membership from the technical Units of the NSO, various Ministries Departments and Agencies, the Universities, National Population Commission, Civil Societies, and development partners/donor agencies like the UNCT, DFID, EU, World Bank, ADB etc. 
>
>Census Communication, Publicity and Advocacy Committee was established to inform and prepare the public about census activities and the need for everyone to cooperate during the census exercise. 
>
>Outsourcing of technical support was done and consultancy support was provided by UNFPA/World Bank/ UNECA. Technical backstopping was in the fields of census organization, census desk top review, census quality control and evaluation, census communication/operational control, electronic programming of questionnaire/analysis (mapping/listing of localities, data processing/ data base management and data analysis/ dissemination.

### 2.3.2	Lessons Learnt 
Some of the challenges and lessons learned in establishment of implementation committees include:
1.	Inconsistency in attendance of committee meetings, some key stakeholders send different representatives to attend committee meetings, this makes their contributions inconsistent and limited. 
2.	Some key stakeholders failed to attend the meetings and only appeared when it was too late into implementation. This made the committees experience difficulties in tracking and follow up on the deliberations. 
3.	Late inauguration of sub national census committees coupled with limited and inadequate representation in these committees. This is due to the limited number of NSO staff as well as limited human resource capacity and the omission of some key stakeholders in the membership composition of sub national committees.
4.	Some sub national committees had no uniformity in representation by various offices despite the deliberate fixing of offices that should be represented on the committees as members. This non-uniformity affects implementation modalities and disadvantages some sub national administrative units.
5.	Conflict of interest among committee members due to their varied self- interests especially at the sub national level, which negatively impacts on census activities like recruitment and procurement. Kenya faced this at the sub national level.
### 2.3.3	 Recommendations 
Based on the selected country experiences and the lessons learned in implementation of census committees, it is recommended that for future PHCs, countries should officially pronounce the composition of committee members in time as a good gesture. This gives the legitimacy of the membership and ensures full representation of the necessary offices. 
