---
id: 10.3. Data collection and transmission
sidebar_position: 4
---

The 2020 PHC round, a few African countries started to explore multimodal enumeration methods such as face-to-face interview with an electronic questionnaire, telephone interview, self-enumeration with a paper questionnaire collected by enumerators, self-enumeration with a paper questionnaire returned by mail, self-enumeration via the Internet, register-based enumeration, and use of pre-existing administrative records. These data collection approaches can either substitute or complement the traditional face-to-face or used in combination (multi-mode method ).

During data collection, the following should be in place:
-	A hierarchical field organization structure, the central level being response  for monitoring the enumeration of the entire country , the regional level focusing on preparing and conducting the data collection process, the local level mainly to provide census enumerators and their immediate supervisors within their operational area during the enumeration. The local level should have IT-related skills.
-	A real time online monitoring tool for successful field enumeration, it is desirable to transfer data immediately after completing the enumeration of each household. This tool can be set up at the regional level to complement the national system. ECA has provided support to countries in this area through field monitoring dashboards, issue trackers and set up of call centres.
-	A well-documented data transmission plan to support enumeration efforts.

### 10.3.1	Selected country experiences
Almost all countries in Africa that undertook a digital census in the 2020 PHC round used the de facto approach with face-to-face interviews, however, South Africa used three data collection approaches (CAPI, CATI, CAWI). Despite having a clear census reference night and enumeration period an extension is made to ensure complete coverage. Below are some highlights of selected country experiences:

**Kenya**

>The 2019 KPHC adopted a de facto approach where all persons within the boundaries of Kenya were enumerated based on where they spent the census reference night (24th/25th August 2019) and continued for seven days up to 31st August 2019. A mop up exercise was conducted for two days (1st and 2nd September 2019) to ensure that all persons were enumerated. Data was collected through the canvasser method and captured using mobile devices (tablets).
>
>Whereas the enumeration of the population living in conventional households continued throughout the census week, enumeration of special population (travelers, vagrants/outdoor sleepers, hotels, prison inmates, remand homes, police cells, hospital inpatients, and children’s homes) was strictly done on the census night using short questionnaires; while enumeration in the special areas such as army barracks, GSU camps, police lines, prisons, NYS camps, monasteries and convents was done by enumerators drawn from those institutions using hybrid questionnaires. Dignitaries and other VIPs were mainly enumerated within the first two days. After each household was enumerated, the enumerator added letter “E” on the structure and household number earlier written during pre-enumeration household listing on doors to indicate that the household had been enumerated (e.g., S015/030/E).
>
>The collected data was sent to the central server by enumerators after completion of every household or several households depending on the availability of internet connectivity. Coordinators, ICT, and content supervisors supported by County and Sub County census committee members coordinated and supervised the exercise.  In the event of a tablet’s failure to send the data to the server, the enumerators shared their data via Bluetooth with their respective content supervisors, who eventually sent it to the server.

**South Africa**

>STATSA conducted a fully digital census de facto census, i.e. all people in South Africa were counted from where they were on the designated census night (02 February 2022). A multi-modal approach to data collection was used with three alternative methods for households to participate -Computer Assisted Personal interview (CAPI) which involved face-to-face interviews with a census fieldworker who visited households and collected data from populations in transit/travelling, homeless and Special Dwelling Institutions (Hotels, B&B, guest houses, hospitals, police and military barracks, Prisons and boarding schools, nursing homes, etc.). Computer Assisted Web Interview (CAWI) were used to enable the respondent to complete the census questionnaire online after registering. Computer Assisted Telephonic Interview (CATI) was also used, where the respondent completed the census questionnaire telephonically with the assistance of a STATSA official. 
>
>Household registrations increased significantly in the days preceding the original close of registration which coincided with the first week of enumeration, Stats SA official’s quote on the advantages of CAWI. “It appears that once households realized how quick and easy it is to complete the online Census form, word got around prompting the spike in registrations. There have been numerous requests to the call Centre for us to reopen registration. The online form can be completed on a computer or smartphone and is data free to the user. Stats SA says the form is simple to complete and will take about ten to 45 minutes, depending on the size of the household.”

### 10.3.2	Lessons Learnt 

1.	Digital enumeration was affected by gadget related concerns such as:

    i.	Failure in real time data transmission to the central server arising from poor network connectivity,

    ii.	Failure in updating and data sharing between the enumerators and content supervisors that was affected by blockage of the application and late introduction of Mobile Device Management software.

    iii.	Interference and slowing down of the enumeration process because for some devices, sim cards kept popping out. (Case in Kenya)

  	iv.	Continuous updating of the census software posed some challenges and the system stabilized after installation of Census live. (Case in Kenya)
  	
3.	Logistical challenges may affect enumeration if not handled appropriately such as:
   
    i.	Inadequate transport for ICT Supervisors, administrators, and census committee members hampered effective monitoring during enumeration.

    ii.	Having few people with knowledge of troubleshooting the CAPI application during enumeration.

    iii.	Need to have more than one enumerator assigned to an EA with over 150 households  can arise and if managed can cause major challenges to the enumerators and supervisors to cover.
  	 
5.	Some respondent refusals may arise during enumeration for instance in Kenya, the “Kavonokia” Sect members in Kitui and Tharaka Nithi counties refused to be enumerated. At the same time, there may be respondents reporting not to have been enumerated during and after the enumeration period.  

### 10.3.3	Recommendations    
Based on the country experiences and lessons learnt from the data collection processes, countries should develop a risk management plan for the enumeration phase, and the following recommendations are made:
 
1.	In case of failure of some gadgets to send data to the server, there should be a clear strategy on alternative ways of how data can be sent such as: utilizing blue tooth sharing with supervisors or manually extracting data from the tablets. although the latter has a risk of total loss in case the tablet is lost. The ICT programmers come in handy for possible solutions and should always be available in sufficient numbers as well as the local administrators who can arbitrate in case of respondent refusals. 
2.	A toll-free line provided to the public to make calls to the census call centre at the headquarters should be in place to easy communication between the office and the community during enumeration. 
