---
id: 7.3. Procurement
sidebar_position: 3
---


## 7.3 Procurement 
Procurement is an important component to successfully implement a census. Census procurement planning involves assessing and projecting the procurement needs of a census operation. The UN P&R guides that the procurement planning process should consider the following:
-	Have logistical coordination with multiple census activities and counterparts to reduce the risk of encountering problems that may lead to additional costs and delays.
-	Have the essential components in procurement planning such as a needs assessment, cost estimation and requirement done as the first steps in the procurement process.
-	Apply the principle of best value for money i.e., get the best mixture of technical and financial attributes that create balance between price and performance for efficiency.
-	Promote effective competition as a means of ensuring fairness, integrity, transparency and achieving best value for money by: developing a procurement strategy, conduct a market research of suppliers, apply national procurement regulations, use formal methods of solicitation.
-	Ensure fairness in the procurement process, it should be free from favoritism, self-interest or preference in judgment and give timely information that is made known simultaneously to all interested parties.

### 7.3.1	Selected country experiences
Procurements were handled by the NSO with the overall government procurement framework.

**Kenya**
>A procurement sub-committee was appointed one year before the census enumeration to handle all procurement activities. The team developed procurement guidelines in conformity with the current country Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (PPADA, 2015) and the relevant regulations, which provided procurement and financial flow guidelines on various aspects of the 2019 KPHC procurement process.  
>
>Open tendering method was the main procurement method used during acquisition of the census materials and equipment. Procurement plans were prepared before each financial year and had to be approved by the Board before execution. The process adhered to the detailed approved 2019 KPHC procurement plan. All procurements of goods, equipment, and services for the 2019 KPHC was centrally handled at the headquarters as detailed by the Guidelines. However, in exceptional cases where the situation on the ground and logistical challenges dictated that a specific procurement could be undertaken at the County level. In such a scenario the procurement sub-committee advised accordingly to facilitate the activity and ensured that the process adheres to PPADA, 2015 guidelines.  At the sub-national level, the county census committees and sub-county census committees were established to oversee implementation of the procurement activities especially acquisition of training facilities and storage facilities.
>
>Synergy existed between different census committees (procurement and technology data management sub-committees) and the procurement division, and user directorates that facilitated the smooth running of the process. There was good communication between the procurement division and the user directorate on item specifications/Terms of reference (TORs) to ensure that any deviations were detected early, and action taken. The user directorate provided adequate specifications/Terms of reference (TORs) as per the requirements to procurement section which ensured timely procurement. Procurement sub-committee meetings appraised the members with census materials requests before they are forwarded to the Director General for approval.
>
>Secretariat scheduled meetings frequently (fortnightly) where status reports were provided and this enhanced monitoring of the procurement progress. A special census procurement file was opened for the purpose of checking and monitoring the status of procurement processes to enable proper documentation of all procurements.
Involvement and engagement of relevant stakeholders (Ministry of ICT and others) in the planning process especially in the acquisition of mobile devices addressed any possible challenges and risks that may hinder the performance of procurement activity. This minimized possible challenges and risks that might have hindered the performance of the procurement activity.
>
>Disposal of mobile devices required data removal which consumed valuable time because they could not be disposed with KNBS data.

### 7.3.2	Lessons Learnt
Although, procurement guidelines are developed to ease the process of handling the acquisition of census materials. Countries experience challenges that can disrupt work as such mechanisms should be put in place to ensure smooth operations. Procurement for goods, works and services for the 2019 KPHC presented some challenges despite the timely planning by the procurement sub-committee, from which lessons are drawn:
1.	Lack of an in-country market survey to identify large scale production companies to allow for proper planning about whether to procure locally or internationally. If not done, this will cause delay in supply of some items due to large quantities required yet the contracted suppliers had to import the materials 
2.	Emerging new procurement requirements that were not initially captured in the census procurement plan and budget may arise. For instance, during uploading of maps on the mobile devices, those for urban areas failed thus reverted to printing which had not been planned for. There being inadequate printing machines, outsourcing of printing services had to done instead of printing in-house as planned.

### 7.3.3	Recommendations
Based on the African country experience, this handbook recommends that for a successful census procurement and disposal implementation: 
1.	There should be timely constitution of the procurement and disposal committee and appointment of its sub-committees such as the Inspection and Acceptance/Rejection Committee (evaluation committee) that ensures that the goods and services are availed promptly. This will enable early planning and coordination of procurement processes. Where necessary external stakeholders should be involved in all stages of procurement for electronic devices.
2.	There should be strong synergy among the census committees, the user directorates with the procurement division. This should be buttressed with effective communication between the procurement division and the user directorate on item specifications. There should be frequent and regularly scheduled procurement committee meetings to provide status updates that in turn enhance monitoring of progress made in requested materials and avoid unnecessary delays in procurement. Additionally, there should be early identification of risks and forwarding them to risk management committee for timely mitigation to reduce their probability and likely impact.
