---
id: 13.2. Challenges of digital archiving
sidebar_position: 2
---

Some of the limitations for proper archiving of census materials and products include:

-	Legal obstacles- there may be no sufficient policy framework in place to guide in archiving of the census records and materials.
-	Technical capacity obstacles may include lack of in-house capacity to handle the complex aspects such as data anonymization and curation of microdata to ensure its long-term availability. Lack of training in creating metadata records for microdata. Lack of capacity to administer existing microdata dissemination platforms and limited microdata archiving skills.
-	Technological challenges for instance lack of adequate computers, lack of a functional website or outdated website or websites that are not optimally functional. Nonexistence and outdated microdata dissemination platforms. This is coupled with the rapid pace of technology and the fast-changing nature of electronic data storage media present a challenge to the preservation of information over a long period of time. With the rapid change of technology, migration of archival systems to modern ones is inevitable. This calls for digital migration to improve cost effectiveness, avoid media decal and adhere to new user requirements. 
-	Inadequate financial resources to support the process of undertaking documentation of microdata files, to meet the costs of creating access tools and safeguards, and of supporting authorization enquiries made by the research community; helping data users of microdata files to navigate complex file structures and variable definitions.
-	Limited budget allocation to archiving - Government and donor expenditure is allocated mainly for data collection, and very little funding is provided for the long-term preservation, archiving of census records, and sharing of micro-data.
