## 11.3	Development of Census Products

**The process**
Development of census products is a process typically led by the NSO and production of census products is part of the census process. The following considerations should be made:

•	Before embarking on production of census products, NSOs are required to identify the products to be generated from census data.

•	Census products should be developed for various stakeholder groups as stakeholder segmentation improves understanding and utilization of the developed products.  

•	Partnership with national / international stakeholders is a common practice in the production of census products. There are various operational modalities for producing census products. There is no one-fits-all approach, common ones include: 

    o	NSO to undertake the entire tasks in partnership with sectoral ministries; National academic or public research institution lead NSO and sectoral ministries -this could be under an MOU or contracting the services.
    
    o	Donors provide resources to hire research institutions or national/international consultant(s) to lead in areas/topics where national capacity is lacking in partnership with NSO and sectoral ministries/national institutions. 
    
    o	Outsourcing by subcontracting the entire production of census products either to national or international research institutions and/or consultants. 
    
•	In development of census products there should be clear stakeholder roles based on their comparative advantage such as: 

    o	Census implementing agency has the technical and management leadership; planning of the census products’ release schedule; data analysis and content production; dissemination as well as data sharing if required. 
    
    o	Sectoral ministries guide selection of topics , give sectoral expertise; policy analysis; quality assurance, and data utilization for evidence-based decision-making.
    
    o	Academia and national researchers provide research capacity; advanced statistical expertise; disciplinary and context-specific knowledge.
    
    o	International consultants and research firms provide supplementary capacity for research and analysis, outsourcing of recruitment / contract management. 
    
    o	Development partners provide resource mobilization; technical support; operational support; promotion of international standards and best practices; quality assurance as well as capacity building at the NSO if required.
    
    o	Donors provide funding, prioritization of topics and data utilization for development programs.
    
•	Other factors to be considered when preparing the implementation plan include availability of human resources at NSO; research capacity in national government and academic institutions; technical assistance / capacity building required; composition of research teams; sequence of the thematic reports; budget; and access to data.

•	When developing census products, the following checklist should be put in consideration:

>Functionality – it does what users need it to do; Usability – is easy for people to access and use; Reusable – design is reusable, people can reuse the product; Helpful features – should solve users’ problems; Findable – clear product name or title, matches what users will use as search terms online; Look and feel – no clutter, consistent language, and looks professional.

**The content**
It is important to prioritize visualization of the census data because it helps to give a fast overview or summary of a dataset; it communicates memorable and important stories in a dataset; it reveals insights that would otherwise be hidden.

When designing digital content, it is desirable to use simple, non-technical language, clear and concise headings and sub-headings, short sentences of no more than 25 words, compact paragraphs of no more than four sentences, bullet points to make text easier to read, frontloaded text with the most important information first and charts where appropriate to illustrate text.

Topics for dissemination depend on census content. Consultations with users are important when determining the questionnaire design. The consultations should include planned tabulations and other outputs and the development of the census database. Census topics should meet the requirements of users, considering cost-effectiveness, human resources, time availability and respondent burden. 

### 11.3.1	Selected Country Experiences

**Kenya** 
>The process of producing the 2019 census products started with identification of a technical team drawn from the KPHC Technical Working Committee and those with experience from the 2009 census to lead the process.
>
>A concept note to undertake the development of outputs was developed and the required technical assistance was sourced from universities and MDAs, while the financial support was obtained from various development partners. During implementation of the process, mapping of the users and key stakeholders by thematic area/sector and formation of teams by thematic areas; Identifying the key indicators by thematic area taking into consideration both international, regional and national indicators; Development of tabulation plans per thematic area and report formats which were presented to the TWC for discussion and approval; and the team took lead in all the phases of production of census products. 
>
>During development of the census products, the following steps were followed: 1) Development of tabulation plans for various indicators; 2) Generation of tables for the various indicators; 3) Undertaking consistence checks based on the outputs from various tables; 4) Review of the  of edit specifications to address any noted inconsistencies;  5) Generation of final tables from cleaned data set; 6) Report writing and peer review of the reports; 7) Editing and formatting of the reports; 8) Validation of the reports through engagement of various stakeholders; 9) Printing of the final report; 10) Launch of the reports. 
 
**Eswatini**
>Thematic reports and population projections reports were produced but the Launch of thematic reports was delayed by two years because there was a shortage of staff to undertake data cleaning. UNFPA provided a Census Technical Specialist who was stationed within the NSO, managed the production of census products.
>
>The process of developing census products entailed; the involvement of subject area specialists from within and outside of government (NSO personnel including the GIS Unit, health, education, the UN and others); So far  they have produced a series of thematic reports packaged in 10 publications.

### 11.3.2	Lessons Learnt
1.	Need to identify various users/stakeholders in time and engage them in the entire census process  as this ensures key indicators are included in the various products and provision of technical/financial support; Identification of thematic experts and engaging them in time.
2.	Development of census products is an integral part of the entire census process, failure in one step affects the other (see the case of Eswatini).

### 11.3.3	Recommendations
Planning and development of the census products should be well thought out, planned, and budgeted for to have a successful outcome of the census without delays in release of findings. Untimeliness compromises the quality and trust in the data.
