---
id: 9.4. Data Security
sidebar_position: 5
---

Census data consist of sensitive information about individuals, households, and communities, including demographic data, socio-economic data, and other personal details. It is imperative to handle this data securely and adhere to privacy rules to ensure confidentiality and protect the privacy of the individuals, households, and communities represented in the data.

Census data security refers to the measures and practices that are implemented to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data collected during a census operation and afterwards in the time of data analysis and dissemination. Census data security involves various aspects, including:

**- Confidentiality:** Ensuring that census data is kept confidential and not disclosed to unauthorized individuals or entities. This may involve using encryption techniques, access controls, and other security measures to prevent unauthorized access to census data. Two factor authentication needs to be in place to secure tablets which are used for data collection.  Mobile Device Management (MDM) tools help to wipe out census data from a tablet if it is lost or stolen.

**-	Integrity:** Ensuring that census data is accurate, reliable, and free from unauthorized tampering or modification. This may involve using data validation techniques, data backups, and data verification processes to maintain the integrity of the data throughout the census process.

**-	Availability:** Ensuring that census data is available to authorized users and stakeholders when needed, while also protecting against data loss or downtime. This may involve using redundant data storage systems, backup and disaster recovery plans, and other measures to ensure data availability.

**- Access control:** Implementing strict access controls to ensure that only authorized personnel have access to census data. This may involve using authentication and authorization mechanisms, such as usernames, passwords, and role-based access controls, to restrict access to census data to only those who are authorized to view or manipulate it.

**-	Data encryption:** Using encryption techniques to protect census data from unauthorized access or interception during transmission or storage. It is particularly important to encrypt census data while transmitting data from tablets to the central processing servers. This may involve using encryption protocols, such as Secure Socket Layer (SSL) or Transport Layer Security (TLS), to encrypt data transmitted over networks, as well as encrypting data stored on tablets and servers or in databases.

**-	Data breach response:** Having plans and processes in place to respond to potential data breaches, including detecting and mitigating any security incidents that may occur during the census process. This may involve conducting regular security audits, monitoring for security breaches, and having incident response plans in place to address any security incidents that may arise.

**-	Compliance:** Ensuring that the census process adheres to relevant laws, regulations, and industry standards related to data protection and privacy. This may include complying with data protection laws, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR ), and following best practices for data security and privacy in the census process.

APN (Access Point Name) connections could be more secure than Internet connections because they are typically managed by mobile network operators and may have additional security features and restrictions in place. APN connections have stricter authentication requirements, and they are subject to more stringent network monitoring and filtering by the mobile network operators. 
In general, census data security requires utmost attention to protect the privacy and confidentiality of individuals' information and maintain the integrity and availability of the data collected, while adhering to relevant laws and regulations.

### 9.4.1 Selected Country experiences
For data security purposes, accreditation was done as well as data encryption as demonstrated below:

#### Kenya
>Data security was achieved through several methods including encryption, secure file transfer and authentication. The system used for data transmission from the mobile devices to the census servers employed industry-leading encryption mechanisms to ensure that data was always encrypted and secure while in transit. In addition, secure sockets layer (SSL) technology and strong encryption keys were implemented at the point of collection and transmission to the server.
> 
>To ensure the security of the mobile devices including the application and data, the following was implemented; the mobile devices were running on a tested up-to-date android operating system, there was a logon PIN/Password required to protect against unauthorized access to the device, MDM software was installed to track the devices in case of theft. The MDM had an application locking software to protect installed apps from being uninstalled and introduction of unauthorized apps. Lastly, the devices were protected with a screen protector and flip cover to provide shock protection in case of falls.
>
>To ensure data security, a Private Access Point Name (APN) was configured to ensure that the SIM Cards could only communicate to the Census servers.
>

#### Sierra Leone
>For data security reasons, only accredited functionaries were allowed to use the App, the mapping PAD would periodically run system authentication on every phone the App is installed. The mapping PAD remote submission process utilized a top-level security cloud system to scan and safely deliver uploaded tasks to GIS portal. The GIS portal could only be opened by registered and verified GIS Officers.

#### Botswana
>Statistics Botswana used fort iGATE firewall as the first layer of security to protect internal network from external untrusted traffic. They made sure that the antivirus for the organization is installed on all the servers including that of the Census for data protection. 
>
>Overall, the 2022 PHC had four end users with authorized access in the tablets, laptops, and desktops. In addition, each IT personnel was using their Passwords to log in to the servers.

### 9.4.2 Lessons learnt.
1. Some of the challenges experienced by the ICT team in Kenya included, late introduction of the mobile device management (MDM) software during census enumeration. The software was aimed at blocking unnecessary mobile device applications that would interfere with census processes. 

### 9.4.3 Recommendations
1.	Network security at all levels should be ensured through use of firewalls, updated antivirus and continuous monitoring of the processes. 
2.	To ensure the entire infrastructure security at all levels, the census implementing agency can engage a consultant to work with the ICT team in areas such as data center security, transmission security, network security and penetration testing among others. This technical advice can in addition provide for network intrusion checks.
3.	The practice of not printing Enumeration area Maps but rather have soft copies installed on the tablets is a recommended good practice that saves costs and unnecessary anxiety in areas that have boundary conflicts that can get violent and even destroy the data. For instance, Sierra Leone used Census Pad with online resources like Open Street to generate soft copy maps of enumeration areas installed on the tablets. 
