## 3.5 Map production
After the mapping data is collected and sent to the central servers, a team of GIS technicians are engaged to undertake digitization of the EAs (EA map production). During map production, the census geo-file is developed to be used during provisioning of tablets, enumeration and geospatial data analysis.  
Map production is implemented in two stages. 
**Stage 1:** Digitization of village boundaries; delineation of EAs from village polygons; creation of the EA attribute data (geography File- geo-file); preparation of EA maps (map compilation) and printing of hard copy maps for editing and verification. 
**Stage 2:** Effecting changes from field verification; updating the geo-file; preparation of the final EA map (PDF format); printing of final maps for enumeration.
Delineation of EAs should take into consideration the distance and the number of households to be covered by the enumerator within the stipulated census enumeration period. 
3.5.1	Selected country experiences
It is noted that despite undertaking digital cartographic mapping, maps are printed in hard copy to facilitate map validation and training in some countries while others were completely paperless. Below are some country experiences:

**Kenya**
>A team of GIS technicians were recruited to support the GIS team in undertaking map production. 
>**Stage 1**
>•	Digitization was carried out by first downloading the spatial data collected from the cloud server. ArcGIS software was used to overlay spatial data on satellite imagery for rural areas or aerial photographs for urban areas.  The data would be symbolized by village name to determine the extent of a village. Digitization of village boundaries was guided by already generated schema. 
>•	Delineation of EAs was done based on measure of size which is between 50 and 149 households making an average of 100 households. A village with more than 149 households was subdivided to create more than one EA whereas one with less than 50 households was merged with another next to it. An EA was therefore either part of a village, an entire village or several villages combined. 
>•	The EA polygons were cleaned by creating topologies to show where overlaps and gaps exist. Each EA was described by its administrative and political units, type (rural or urban), status (informal or formal) and universal (special or conventional). The information was added on the EA polygons attribute table to create the census geo-file. 
>•	A 13-digit code was generated from administrative units to uniquely identify each EA. Maps were prepared using templates generated during development of tools. Two maps were created, a sub-location map with all the EAs or several EAs in that sub-location and every individual EA map. 
>**Stage 2**
>•	The maps were printed for editing guided by the editing forms and later printed for use during verification. Rural maps were printed on A3 size paper while urban maps were printed on A2 size paper. 
>•	Maps returned from verification were returned to map production for the GIS technicians to effect changes from the field. After effecting the changes, final PDF maps and geo-files were forwarded by counties to uploaded on the tablets to be used during census enumeration. 
>•	Hard copy maps were also printed for training and EA identification. 
>
>**Sierra Leone**
>•	Mappers were in the field collecting data and creating temporary Enumeration Area boundaries and saving the data into the cloud. The GIS Officers and assistants who were in the respective District Offices downloaded data as sent from the field via google cloud. The EAs were digitized and delineated using ArcGIS Mapping software tool. 
>•	The mapping PAD remote submission process utilizes a top-level security cloud system to scan and safely deliver uploaded tasks to GIS portal. GIS portal can only be opened by registered and verified GIS Officers. 
>•	No physical maps were printed for actual census enumeration instead a Census Pad application was used with online resources like Open Street based on cartographic enumeration area boundary shapefiles, and the spatial data collected. These facilitated the census staff to locate their Enumeration areas without hard copy maps. 
### 3.5.2	Lessons Learnt
1.	NSOs did not plan for adequate server space to accommodate the huge geo spatial data, editing personnel, GIS licenses, or computer machines with adequate capacity. 
2.	In most cases, the map production process started late causing delays in concluding the mapping phase.   

### 3.5.3	Recommendations
1.	It is recommended that proper training and supervision of mapping assistants should be done to avoid the creation of gaps that could delay completion of delineation of EA boundaries. 
2.	NSOs should plan for adequate server space to accommodate the huge geo spatial data such as satellite imageries and aerial photographs. 
3.	There is need to plan for adequate editing personnel to avoid delaying the EA map editing process. 
4.	NSOs should plan for adequate GIS licenses and workstations to facilitate faster digitization process.
5.	NSOs should purchase adequate computer machines  with adequate capacity to process the complex and huge geospatial data. 
6.	It is important to start map production in time to enable earlier finalization to inform other census processes.  
