## 3.6 EA Map verification
EA map verification is the process of undertaking field verification of the boundaries of the created EAs by the local administration before the maps are finalized for census enumeration. At the end of the delineation process, it is necessary to assess the accuracy of the maps, completeness of the mapping, household sizes and to verify EA boundaries. EA map verification is therefore aimed at reducing the EA boundary errors before the maps can be used. The verification process provides an opportunity to review, inspect, check, audit, establish and document whether EA maps reflected the actual situation on the ground. 
### 3.6.1	Selected country experiences
It is noted that map verification involved returning or getting in touch with the actual community to confirm what has been produced, the verification team is different from the mapping team. Below are selected country experiences:
>**Kenya:** the exercise was undertaken by trained verification officers and coordinators who worked with the NGAO s with a collective role of confirming that all the maps and geo-file for their respective administrative units were available and that they were in their correct geographic locations and had correct spellings. During verification, several NGAOs were brought together. 
>Additionally, the verification process identified missing features/facilities, spelling mistakes, confirmed the number of villages and boundaries, etc.  The key tools were therefore the sub-location map and geo-file. The exercise started after several EA maps had been produced for a number of counties. It was conducted in phases where in each phase several counties were covered. 
>Verified maps and verification forms were forwarded to the map production office to effect the changes that had been documented before final production of maps. Major errors noted during verification included: spelling errors, wrong village/EA naming, incorrect EA numbering, disjointed/fragmented (Flying ) villages, omission of features, gaps where some households had not been mapped, unclear boundaries, incomplete naming of features. 32% of the EAs had one or more of the above errors. 
>Sierra Leone:  The verification process was followed up with a ground truthing exercise. To ensure that only accredited functionaries use the App, the mapping PAD periodically runs system authentication on every phone the App is installed.
### 3.6.2	Lessons Learnt
1.	New administrative units may come up after mapping and these interfere with the geo-file, several points of interest were missed out by the mapping assistants therefore not reflecting the actual picture on the ground.
2.	Insufficient communication given to the community leaders during sensitization led to having absent Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs that made verification of their area maps difficult because the team had to make alternative arrangements to use other people or come back later.
3.	Allowances for some levels of NGAOs were not factored in the census payment guidelines and rates therefore created a challenge on how to compensate them when they attended the verification meetings. This calls for comprehensive planning and budgeting.
4.	Politics and insecurity can affect map verification: political and partisan interests on the ground tended to interfere with the workflow. Insecurity in some areas led to the team requiring special security arrangements that necessitated rescheduling of the programme. 
5.	Illiterate administrators in some areas made interpretation of the map and geo-file difficult.
