---
sidebar_position: 8
---

## 3.7 Mapping personnel (recruitment, training, deployment, payments, leave/HR issues)
Like the entire census process, the personnel, and processes to obtain them should be of the highest standards to achieve good quality data. Computer and IT literacy should be one of the skills that a mapper should possess among others. Details can be obtained from Chapter 6 on census recruitment. 

### 3.7.1	Selected country experiences
Sierra Leone exhibited the best practices for recruiting, training, and deploying mapping personnels to ensure good quality data is obtained.
>**Sierra Leone**
>•	The Statistics Sierra Leone Councils that oversee the institution and thus responsible for the recruitment processes in the institution coordinated and supervised the recruitment process of the cartographic field staff. 
>•	It all started with advertisement, shortlisting, and interview of shortlisted candidates. The recruitment was done at district level involving the local authorities and they ensured that the recruited staff were able to speak local languages, the mapping staff can communicate well among other considerations. 
>•	The local authorities also supported the cartographic mapping process by recommending local guards that were to lead the mapping teams to hard-to-reach areas. 
>•	Cascaded training was done starting with the Training of Trainers who were identified based on both qualification and experience after which the district level training of the field staff was conducted. At the end of the training, exams were conducted, and the best performing candidates were recruited. 
>•	The cadre of personnel engaged in the Sierra Leone cartographic mapping included: Mappers mainly responsible for collecting data, updating features and delineating the EAs on the imagery; Team leaders to supervise and undertake quality checks of the mappers in the field; GIS officer to coordinate the work of the GIS Assistants at the district level; National GIS officer responsible for coordination of all digital mapping activities in the Country; National coordination team that included senior cartographers to oversee implementation of the cartographic activity in the country. He is to liaise with the regional coordinator to ensure the smooth running and successful conclusion of the exercise in the country. 
>•	Quality Assurance Team (QA) to ensure that Quality Assurance/Quality Control procedures are well established and understood by members of the Census cartographic team.
