---
id: 3.1. Development of digital cartographic mapping instruments and tools
sidebar_position: 2
---

Among the tools developed for digital cartographic mapping there are various forms used for sensitization, field mapping activities, verification, instructions manuals, digitization schemas, map templates as well as map editing, map production and verification. In development and finalization of these tools and instruments, most countries benchmarked and got inputs and assistance from other countries that had undertaken digital census mapping. The cartographic tools should be able to assign a unique coding and identification system to avoid any omissions .

### 3.1.1	Selected country experiences
As part of the digital cartographic mapping, all countries considered the most convenient technology and application to be used based on the intended output and cost. Below are some highlights of selected countries experiences regarding the output of the mapping, data collection forms used for mapping, and the software used.
#### 3.1.1.1	Intended output from mapping.
#### Namibia
>Namibia aimed to provide detailed information regarding the use of built-up structures as well as develop a Statistics Business Register and the National Dwelling Unit Frame meant to provide detailed household and land use information for each Dwelling Unit.

#### Kenya
>Kenya aimed to update her geography file for all counties and sub-counties with villages and Enumeration Areas as well as number of households.

#### Sierra Leone
> Sierra Leone aimed to achieve a verified and categorized nationwide locality list of all administrative levels showing the name of each locality, district, chiefdom, and section with a unique code.

#### 3.1.1.2	Data collection forms used for mapping
#### Kenya
>Two household listing forms were developed: rural homestead and household listing form (F-54-5-1A and F-54-5-1B) and urban structure and household listing form (F-54-5-2) used for collecting data in rural and urban areas respectively, both collected the GPS coordinates for each household and their elevation. In addition, there was a summary form F-54-5-1A used by village elders while F-54-5-1B used by the data collection teams to compile villages and Enumeration Areas.

#### Sierra Leone
>The cartographic mapping questionnaire was developed to capture information on, building use, locality class, classes of roads, water bodies and expected drainage type etc. The questionnaire was mainly designed to enable the head of the household to give information about the structure and number of members in the household. Other information was obtained using observation methods by the field staff.  

#### Namibia
>The approach to questionnaire design focused on capturing the main elements relating to the use of a building and in the case of a dwelling unit, occupants were asked the name of the head of the household, contact details, the number of rooms, and the number of usual members residing in each dwelling unit including other basic services regarding the structure they reside in, such as the source of water, electricity, and access to sanitation. The inclusion of the many stakeholder requests changed the project from a typical cartographic exercise to a statistical undertaking.

#### Senegal
>The design of the Mapping tools was a build up from versions of the previous census. They were finalized in technical workshops and bench-marking at INECV Cape Verde (for Cartography) and INSD Burkina Faso (for enumeration).

#### 3.1.1.3	Software used
#### Sierra Leone
>An android-based mapping PAD  application with a data acquisition package was built by Milsat Technologies to be used for the cartographic mapping exercise to fit all the data needs in a robust manner. The application was able to prompt the mapper when it reaches a minimum threshold of an EA to be delineated. It also ensured that the mapper is within the confines of the structure wanting to collect information about as seen on the satellite imagery. The application integrated both the spatial dataset and the data attributes collected on the same platform. The application has provision to work both offline and online that ensured that work is continuous even where there is no internet coverage. These innovations made it possible to achieve a sustainable national geographic frame for Censuses and Surveys.

#### Botswana
>SmartClient for Census a WEB-based Client-Server software solution was used to collect, transmit, store and clean mapping data. SmartClient for Census enables different users to log into the system to execute tasks allocated to them and has GIS architecture with one central database for office and field work, which ensures easy access to data. This ensured that through unique workflows the data capturing was viewed and managed as soon as data was synchronized into the server and field work was ongoing. SmartClient for Census also has an online and offline functionality, that ensured that work is continuous even where there is no internet coverage.

#### Namibia
>The application used to collect, transmit, store and clean mapping data was designed and developed using ArcGIS -Survey 123 by Esri.

#### Kenya
>The Open Data Kit (ODK) a free application was used to develop and test the mapping data collection system and later the ArcGIS-Survey 123 app managed by Esri- Eastern Africa was adopted after being tested and piloted. Although ODK was easy to operate, compatible with Samsung J2 and freely available in play store, Survey 123 was introduced because it was faster to process the data in the ArcGIS environment being used in map production. Survey 123 also provided a dashboard for monitoring teams and individual MA’s. After completion of a village or block the MA would edit and upload the data to the cloud server.

#### Senegal
>The software used for development of the RGPH-5 Mapping tools were: ARCGIS and MOBAC

### 3.1.2	Lessons learnt
1.	While developing cartographic tools and applications, it is important to know the intended output upfront. This guides the choice of the best application and the questions to use in capturing data. 
2.	The inclusion of many stakeholder requests changed the project from a typical cartographic exercise to a statistical undertaking.  This slows down the mapping exercise and affects the entire timing of the census activities. Both Uganda and Namibia experienced this.
### 3.1.3	Recommendations
Based on the selected country experiences and lessons learned in developing mapping tools.
1.	Given the existing internet challenges in some parts of the continent, the choice of software should take into consideration the ability to work both online and offline.
2.	Benchmarking with countries that have already undertaken digital cartographic mapping is key in informing the mapping methodology and especially the choice of software. 
3.	Countries should develop their mapping tools and applications using internal capacity at the NSO like in Kenya, Namibia, Uganda  among others especially with the choice of simple and tried software such as ArcGIS-survey 123 with minimal support from Esri. 
4.	The use of open-source software should be explored given that it was proved to work and saves on costs, e.g., SmartClient that was used in Botswana.
