---
id: 3.2. Pilot mapping 
sidebar_position: 3
slug: /experiences-lessons-2020/chapter-03/3.2-pilot-mapping
---

Pilot mapping is recommended to test the preparedness to undertake the main cartographic mapping process. The aim is to test the validity and reliability of methodology, tools, and equipment to be used in the main cartographic mapping process. The findings from the pilot  inform the finalization of tools, instruments, and methodology. The pilot mapping process entails testing the suitability of the tools, logistical arrangements, assessing the workload, providing a basis for NSOs to mobilize resources and plan for an effective implementation of the process to ensure quality data is obtained. 

While planning for a digital cartographic mapping pilot, it is important to consider the terrain, type of settlement patterns (urban, rural, hard to reach, arid and semi-arid lands) to enable effective testing of processes. See further reading in [pretest and pilot census](https://tech-acs.github.io/e-census-handbook/docs/chapter-04/4.1-Key-areas-to-be-piloted-in-digital-census#41-key-areas-to-be-piloted-in-digital-census).

### 3.2.1	Selected country experiences
Census implementing agencies conducted comprehensive pilot mapping with varied objectives and implementation designs, below are some highlights of selected country experiences:

#### Kenya
>The technology and instruments/tools embraced were tested before the actual cartographic mapping exercise. A pilot mapping exercise was conducted to identify the most ideal tablet for use especially one with high GPS accuracy- Samsung Galaxy J2 phone was identified as having accurate GPS readings; tested the Open Data Kit (ODK) application; tested the use of Satellite imageries and aerial photographs which were used for planning and allocation of work, plotting of boundaries and features; tested the adequacy of the data collection forms; tested the suitability of the KNBS Server and entire ICT system in undertaking the digital cartographic mapping. The pilot was also used to ascertain the type of and number of vehicles to be used as well as the resources that could be required to undertake cartographic mapping in the entire country. 

#### Namibia
>The main objective of the pilot  was to test whether the mapping tools (electronic data collection application and questionnaire) were adequate to provide the required data. This also involved testing the adequacy of logistics and administrative arrangements on the ground.
>
>The results from the pilot were used to review and improve on the mapping implementations in all operational areas. These included reviewing of tools, drawing up the final plans for the main mapping project, as well as providing the final estimation of resources required.

#### Sierra Leone
>The pilot mapping was done in two phases and the section administrative boundary shape file was used: 
>- The first phase was done in the capital city to: assess the cartographic mapping software EA PAD 4.0 and the means of data transmission; assess the use of ARCGIS software in processing the data from EA PAD 4.0 for EA delineation; test the entire systems and processes including logistical requirements, deployments, average time spent to complete an EA in both rural and urban areas; and  identify likely problems to be faced by mappers in the field. 
>- In the second phase, the coverage was increased beyond the capital city with diversified prevailing conditions including hard to reach areas and poor internet connectivity. Three sections were randomly selected across the country. 

### 3.2.2	Lessons learnt

1.	While planning for a digital cartographic mapping pilot, it is important to consider the terrain, type of settlement patterns (urban, rural, hard to reach, arid and semi-arid lands) to enable effective testing of processes. 
2.	Testing of the mapping methodology is key for an effective digital cartographic mapping process. The application used for data collection in Kenya (ArcGIS survey 123) was not tested during the pilot mapping. It was introduced after the pilot mapping to fill the gaps identified from the ODK earlier proposed. Therefore, unanticipated challenges may arise during the main exercise and compromise data quality.

### 3.2.3	Recommendations
1.	With any software development, it is important to give sufficient time to develop and test the cartographic system independently. The software manager must be the one to give the time needed to develop the system together with the census manager to be in sync with the overall census plan and timelines. Namibia had to postpone its first pilot testing because the duration that was allocated for programming tasks was not sufficient. The team had insufficient time allocations for developing and testing the application.
2.	Initial field tests of the mapping application should be done prior to the piloting exercise on a small scale to save costs and perfect the system instead of having two phases of piloting like was the case in Sierra Leone.
   
