---
id: 3.4. Field data collection for cartographic mapping
sidebar_position: 5
slug: /experiences-lessons-2020/chapter-03/3.4-field-data-collection-for-cartographic-mapping
---

Field data collection for digital cartographic mapping entails use of mobile technology to collect spatial data (GPS coordinates for structures, households, features such as schools, hospitals, churches, etc.) to be used in delineation of EAs. Most countries embraced the use of mobile technology to capture the spatial data and transmit it to the central servers for map production.

### 3.4.1 Selected country experiences

#### Kenya
>
>In Kenya, the exercise started with 12 teams with each team comprising of a team leader and 7 mapping assistants. There were also coordinators in charge of several teams. The number of teams was later increased to 40 with a total of 400 temporary Mapping Assistants (MAs) who were recruited and trained to speed up the mapping process.
> 
>A team was allocated between 2 and 3 vehicles depending on the number of MAs. All teams were working either in one or two counties at a given time. A team was allocated several sub locations to map the homesteads, structures, households, and points of interest. Each MA was assigned a village or a block to work in at any given time and they would move around the entire village with the help of a village elder. The MA would use the form that had been earlier filled by the village elder to confirm the details listed as well as pick coordinates for the structures, households, and features. Data was collected using mobile phones with an in-built Global Positioning System (GPS).
>
>Mapping for the first 27 counties was carried out using Open Data Kit (ODK) App while the rest were mapped using ArcGIS survey123.  

#### Sierra Leone
>
>In Sierra Leone, the actual field work started with annotation of Satellite imagery, updating of verified locality list, deployment of field staff with required logistics and delineation of EAs using the satellite imagery.
The Data quality assurance officers and Assistants were on the other hand busy with the required quality checks. The National quality officer was supervising all the quality assurance officers also used a customized application to ensure that data from the field mappers shows a true representation of the real information on the ground and in addition do ground truthing for randomly selected delineated EAs.

#### Senegal
>
>The cartography team included: mapping agents, team leaders, regional supervisors, and headquarters experts. Each of these had a functional mobile application under Android set up centrally for an integrated management of census operations.  The supervisor application was used to ensure coordination and monitoring of field operations. The regional supervisor application was used to manage team composition, assign work, check completeness, and send to the server. Team leader application allowed the team leaders to assign tasks to team members and coordinate field work. The cartographer agent application was used to carry out cartographic data collection on the localities.

### 3.4.2 Lessons Learnt

1. During recruitment, adequate reserve mapping assistants should be recruited to stand in when those engaged exit given that the exercise takes a long period.
2. Fragmented and disputed administrative units make it difficult to determine the village boundaries, therefore this needs to be addressed before the mapping teams get to the respective villages.
3. Introduction of new mapping tools midway through the exercise slowed the work  because some mapping assistants could not cope with the changes immediately. This implies that early determination of the end products and testing of all the possible applications is vital.
4. Unclear definition and demarcation of boundaries between urban and rural EAs made it difficult to get accurate data.
5. Clear cartographic mapping plans should be put in place for mapping of mobile populations like nomads and pastoralists, otherwise they can be missed or double counted.

### 3.4.3 Recommendations

1. Cascading and segmenting the mapping application among the field teams with their respective duties is a good practice to ensure quality control.
2. Collecting GPS coordinates for the structures, households and features during the mapping is a good practice to ensure completeness and enhance spatial data analysis. However, it may slow down the mapping exercise during times when the internet is unstable due to weather etc. Therefore, mechanisms  should be put in place to control for displacement of GPS coordinates because of tall buildings and congested structures especially in urban centers.
